# Lec 1
Matrices represent linear operators.  

Multiplication of matrices is composition of operations.  

$A+B=B+A$ but it's not necessarily true that $AB = BA$.  
Consider $\begin{bmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0\end{bmatrix} \ne \begin{bmatrix}0 & 0 \\ 0 & 0\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}0 & 0 \\ 0 & 1\end{bmatrix}\begin{bmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0\end{bmatrix}$.  

$GL_n(\mathbb{R}) \subset M_n(\mathbb{R});\; GL_n(\mathbb{R}) = \{A : \det(A) \ne 0\}$

Invertible/Inverse: $AB = BA = I$.  
If an inverse exists, it's unique.

By restricting to $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$, we gain some things but lose others:  
1. There is no addition law on $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$  
2. Also not closed under scalar multiplication by $0$  
3. But it is closed under matrix multiplication  
   
More properties:  
4. Has multiplication identity $I$.  
5. Has inverse $A^{-1}$.  
6. Product is associative 

These are properties that define the notion of **group**.

A group $G$ is a set with a product operation $g \cdot h \in G$ which   
1. Is associative.  
2. Has an identity element $e$.  
3. Has inverse $g^{-1},\; g \cdot g^{-1} = g^{-1} \cdot g = e$

If $g \cdot h = h \cdot g$ for all pairs $g,h \in G$, we say $G$ is commutative, or Abelian.

Example: $\mathbb{Z}$ under addition. Any vectorspace under vector addition (forget scalar multiplication).  

Most "general" example of a group: Let $T$ be a set, 
$G = \{\text{All bijections: }g: T \rightarrow T\} = sym(T)$ is a group under compostion of transformation. Symmetric group of the set $T$.    

Identity: $e =$ identity map.  
Inverse: exist by bijection.  
Associativity: follows by definition.  

In some sense this is the most general because  groups arise as **bijections** of a set which **preserve the structure** of a set.

When $T = \{1,2,...n\}$, $Sym(T) = S_n$ finite group of order $n!$, which is not Abelian when $n \ge 3$

# Lec 2
**Unitary Group**: Sym($T$)  

Notation: morphism = map;  automorphism = bijective map from a object to itself.  

Why "Ur group"? groups arise as subgroup of goups of form $Sym(T)$. e.g. $GL_n(\mathbb{R}) \subset Sym(\mathbb{R}^n)$

Precisely, $H \subset G$ is subgroup if it is closed under product, contains $e$ and closed under taking inverse.  

$S_n$ permutation group on $n$ letters, or symmetric group on $n$ letters, $|S_n| = n!$.  

$S_1 = \{e\}$  
$S_2 = \{e , \tau\}$ where $\tau: 1 \rightarrow 2;\; 2 \rightarrow 1$.  
$S_3 = \{e , \tau, \tau' ,\tau'', \sigma, \sigma'\}$  
$\tau: 1 \rightarrow 2;\; 2 \rightarrow 1;\; 3 \rightarrow 3$. $\tau$ exchange 2 elements in $T$, called tranposition.  
$\tau': 1 \rightarrow 1;\; 2 \rightarrow 3;\; 3 \rightarrow 2$  
$\tau'': 1 \rightarrow 3;\; 2 \rightarrow 2;\; 3 \rightarrow 1$  
$\sigma: 1 \rightarrow 2;\; 2 \rightarrow 3;\; 3 \rightarrow 1$  
$\sigma': 1 \rightarrow 3;\; 2 \rightarrow 1;\; 3 \rightarrow 2$  
$\tau \sigma: 1 \rightarrow 1;\; 2 \rightarrow 3;\; 3 \rightarrow 2 = \tau'$  
$\sigma \tau: 1 \rightarrow 3;\; 2 \rightarrow 2;\; 3 \rightarrow 2 = \tau''$

Corollary $S_n$ is not Abelian when $n \ge 3$. Proof: $S_3 \subset S_n$ by fixing elements that $n \ge 3$.  

The force operating on an object may be radialy symmetric?  

$S_2$ is Abelian, the multiplication table  is symmetric around the diagnal.  

Subgroup of $GL_n(\mathbb{R})$ that stabilizes the line $y=0$: $\{A = \begin{bmatrix} a & c \\ 0 & d\end{bmatrix} : ad \ne 0\}$.

Proposition: The subgroup of $(\mathbb{Z},+)$ are precisely given by $(b \mathbb{Z}, +)$, where $b$ is a fixed integer.  
trivial subgroup: biggest $G$ itself, $b = 1$; smallest $\{e\}$, $b=0$.  
First show $b\mathbb{Z}$ are all subgroups.  
Then to show these exhast, let $H \subset \mathbb{Z}$ be a subgroup, if $H \ne \{0\}$ then it contains $m \ne 0$, take the positive of $m$ and $-m$, we know it contains $m>0$. Let $b$ be the smallest positive element. For any $H \ni h = mb+r, 0\le r < b$ we know $r \in H \Rightarrow r = 0$, otherwise $b$ is not the smallest.   

Let $G$ be any group and $g \in G$, there a natural subgroup $H = \braket{g}$, called the cyclic subgroup generated by $g$, is the smallest subgroup that contains $g$, consisting $\{...g^{-2}, g^{-1}, e, g, g^2 ...\} = \{g^m: m \in \mathbb{Z}\}$.  

If $g^m = e$ and $m$ is the smallest positive such power, then $m$ is the order of $g \in G$. If no power $g^m = e, m>0$, we say $g$ has infinite order.   

# Lec 3
Groups arise as structure-preserving bijection.  

**Isomorphism**, maps between two groups that are bijective and preserve the multiplication operation.   
$G_1 = \{i^k: k=0,1,2,3\} = \{\pm 1, \pm i\} \subset \mathbb{C}^* = (\mathbb{C} \backslash \{0\}, \times)$  
$G_4 = \braket{\rho: 1 \rightarrow 2;\; 2 \rightarrow 3;\; 3 \rightarrow 4;\; 4 \rightarrow 1} \subset S_4$  

**Cyclic group**: there exist a $g \in G$ such that $G = \braket{g}$. $g$ is called the **generator**.  
$G_1, G_2$ are isomorphic if there is an isomorphism between them.  

$(\mathbb{R}, +)$ and $(\mathbb{R}^{++}, *)$ are isomorphic.  

**Klein 4-group**, two ways to write it  
1. $S_4 \supset G_1 = \{e, \tau_1(1,2,3,4 \rightarrow 2,1,4,3), \tau_2 (1,2,3,4 \rightarrow 3,4,1,2), \tau_1 \tau_2(1,2,3,4 \rightarrow 4,3,2,1)\}$ Each non-identity element has order 2.  
2. $GL_2(\mathbb{R}) \supset G_2 = \{I, \begin{bmatrix} -1 & 0\\ 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix},\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0\\ 0 & -1 \end{bmatrix},\begin{bmatrix} -1 & 0\\ 0 & -1 \end{bmatrix}\}$  
$G_1, G_2$ are isomorphic, they are both Abelian.

Isomorphic testing  
1. $|G_1| = |G_2|$  
2. Abelian  
3. $G_1, G_2$ has the same number of elements of every order.  

Given $G$ we can construct $Aut(G) = \{Isos: G \rightarrow G\}$ called "Symmetries of G", or "structure preserving map" of $G$.  

**Homomorphism**, maps $f: G_1 \rightarrow G_2$ such that 
$$f(xy) = f(x)f(y)$$  
det: $GL_n(\mathbb{R}) \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^*$  
Every isomorphism is a homomorphism.  
$f(x)=e'$ is a trivial homomorphism.  
$f:S_3 \rightarrow S_n$ by keepping $k \ge 4$ the same, is an injective homomorphism.    

**Images**, seeing a group through a homomorphism. 


# Lec 4
From the definition of Homomorphism, we can derive  
$$f(e) = e';\;$$
$$f(x^{-1}) = f(x)^{-1}$$  
Composition of two homomorphism is also a homomorphism.  

Kernel (of a homomorphism)
$$\{g \in G : f(g) = e'\} \subset G$$

If Image = $G'$ and Kernel = $\{e\}$, we say $f$ is an **isomorphism**. Or a bijective homomorphism is isomorphism.  

An **automorphism** is an isomorphism from $G$ to itself.  

Kernel Image are both subgroups of a group.  

Kernel is a normal subgroup of a group.

A **normal subgroup** is defined as a subgroup $H \subset gHg^{-1} \subset G$, such that $gHg^{-1} = H$, where $gHg^{-1} = \{ghg^{-1}: h \in H, g \in G \}$ forms a subgroup of $G$ that contains $H$ as a subgroup. The property is also called **closed under conjugation** by **all** $g \in G$.  

Not a normal subgroup, example $\braket{e, \tau} \subset S_3$  

Now we introduce two homomorphism and compose them.

1. $GL_n(R) \rightarrow GL_1(R) = R^*$ by $f(A) = \det(A)$  
Image = $R^*$   
Kernel = $\{A: \det(A) = 1\} = SL_n(R) \triangleleft GL_n(R)$  

2. $f: S_n \rightarrow GL_n(R)$  
$f(\sigma) = A_\sigma$ is a **permutation matrix**. $a_{\sigma(j),\, j} = 1$  
Image is permutation matrices; Kernel is identity tranformation(trivial).  
$\det(A_\sigma) = \pm 1$ is called the **sign of permutation**.   

The composition of the above two homomorphism, we get a new homomorphism
image = $\braket{\pm 1} \subset R^*$, kernel = $\{\sigma: \det(A_\sigma) = 1\}$.  
The kernel is also called **even permutations**, or **alternating group** of $S_n$, $A_n \triangleleft S_n$. Its order is $n!/2$ when $n \ge 2$.  

The **center** of a group contains elements that commute with every element in $G$. $Z(G) = \{z \in G: zg = gz, \forall g \in G\}$. This is a **normal** subgroup that is **Abelian**.  
$G = Z(G)$ iff $G$ is Ablelian.  
$G = S_n$, then $Z(G) = \{e\}$.  
$G = GL_n(R)$, then $Z(G) = \{ \lambda I : \lambda \in R^* \}$.  

Natural Homomorphism  
$G \rightarrow Auto(G)$  
$g \rightarrow$ some isomorphism from $G$ to $G$, denote as $f_g(h)$  
Take 
$$f_g(h) = g h g^{-1}.$$
It is an **isomorphism**. Once shown homomorphic, the bijection can be shown by taking the inverse as conjugate with $g^{-1}$.  
The kernel of $f$ is the center of $G$.  

Is $f$ a surjection? Not necessarily.  
Consider the Klein 4-group and $f$ is conjugation by $g$, then the image of $f$ is the only the identity tranformation. While the group automorphism of $G$ is isomorphic to $S_3$ by mapping non-identity $\tau_1, \tau_2, \tau_3 \in G$ to a permutation of them.  

Image of $f$ are called the **inner automorphism** of $G$. $Aut(G) \supset Image(f) = Inn(G) = \{a(h) = ghg^{-1} \text{ for some } g \in G\}$.  

# Lec 5  
**Equivalence** relation on a set $S$ would **partition** the set into disjoint subsets.

Equivalence properties:  
1. **reflexive** a~a  
2. **symmetric** a~b then b~a  
3. **transitive** a~b b~c then a~c

Can also be viewed as subset of $S \times S$: $\{(a,b): a \sim b\}$.

Notation:  
$S \rightarrow \overline{S} =$ {equivalence classes in S};  
$S \ni a \mapsto \overline{a} =$ euivalence class that contains $a$. $\overline{a} \in \overline{S}$.  
They are surjective maps of sets.  

Conversely, given a **map** $f: S \rightarrow T$, it gives an **quivalence realtion** (or partition) on $S$ with $\overline{S} = Image(f)$: $a \sim b \Leftrightarrow f(a)=f(b)$ in $T$, we called the pre-image of $t \in T$ the **fiber** above $t$.

Example1 $R \rightarrow T =$circle in $C$ by $f(t) = e^{i2 \pi t}$, $f^{-1}(1) = \{...,-1,0,1,...\}$

Example2 $f: G \rightarrow G'$ is a group homomorphism, let $H \triangleleft G$  be the kernel of $f$. We get an quivalence relation on $G$, where $H$ is one of the quivalence classes. Why? Because $H = \{a: f(a) = f(e) = e' \in G'\}$.  

Cosets  
In the above example 2,   
Proposition: The other equivalence classes have the form $aH = \{ah: h \in H\}$ for some $a \in G$.  
Proof: $f(a)=f(b) \Rightarrow f(a^{-1}b) = e' \Rightarrow b=ah;\;b \in aH \Rightarrow f(a)=f(b)$  
Terminology: $aH$ is called a **left coset** of $H$ in $G$.  
Fact: The map $h \mapsto ah$ gives a **bijection** of sets $H \rightarrow aH$, in particular $|H| = |aH|$ So for a **group homomorphism** the equivalence classes are of the form $aH, H = ker(f)$ and have the same size.(Note: this is **not true** for a **general map** of a set, i.e. set morphism)  

Corollary: Assume $G$ is finite and $f: G \rightarrow G'$ is a homomorphism with kernel $H$ Then
$$ |G| = |H| \cdot |Image(f)| $$
This is analogous to the rank-nullity theorem in linear algebra:  
If $T: V \rightarrow W$ is a linear map,
$$\dim V = \dim (\ker T) + \dim ( \text{Im } T)$$
Example: $|S_n| = n!$, the sign map $f: S_n \rightarrow \{ \pm 1 \}$ is surjective for $n \ge 2$ and kernel is $A_n$, therefore |A_n| = n!/2.  

More generally, let $H \subset G$ be **any** subgroup, not necessarily normal, we define the (left) coset of $a \in G$ by $aH = \{ah: h \in H\}$.  
Proposition: These subsets are disjoint and patition $G$. Furthurmore, they each are in set-theoretic bijection with $H$.  

Define the **index** of $H$ (denoted as $[G:H]$), which might be infite as the number of distict cosets, i.e. equivalence classes.  
More general Corollary:  
$$|G| = |H|[G:H]$$

**Lagrange's Theorem**  
If $|G|$ is finite and $g \in G$, then the order of $g$ divides $|G|$.  
Proof: Let $H = \braket{g}$  

Example: Let $G$ be a finite group, with $|G| = p$, a prime number. Then $G$ is cyclic (therefore Abelian), generated by and $g \in G$ such that $g \ne e$. Furthermore, the only subgroups of $G$ are $G$ and $\{e\}$  
Can we show that this is a strong result (order $p \Rightarrow$ cyclic) by exhibiting a non-cylic that has order $p^2$ or $pq$? Yes, take Klein 4-group (Abelian but not cyclic) and $S_3$ (neither Abelian nor cyclic) as examles.  
However, all groups of order $p^2$ are Abelian.(to be proved.)  

Definition: A group is **simple** if its **only normal subgroup** $H$ are $\{e\}$ and $G$.
Example of simple groups:  
1. Any group of prime order $p$, these are the only Abelian simple groups.  
2. $A_n$ for $n \ge 5$.  
3. Feit-Thompson theorem: Any finite non-Abelian simple group has **even** order.

# Lec 6
To generalize the arithmetic of "odd and even" and make use of the coset and quivalence relations --  
**Congruence** mod $n$ and its arithmetic
Fix a positive integer $n$ and define an equivalence relation on $Z$ by
$$ a \sim b \iff n | (a-b) \iff (a-b) \in nZ$$
This satisfies the three properties of equivalence. We introduce the notation
$$a \equiv b \; (\text{mod } n)$$
a synonym for $a \sim b$ with $n$ explicit, meaning $a$ congruent to $b$ mod $n$.  

For $a \in Z$ write $\bar{a}$ to denote the equivalence class of mod $n$. Then 
$$ \bar{a} = a+ nZ = \{a + bn | b \in Z\}$$
$\bar{a}$ is a coset of $H = nZ$ in $Z$  

Observation: There are $n$ distint cosets of $Z$ of equivalence class of mod $n$,
$$ \bar{0}, \bar{1}... \overline{n-1}$$
Notation: For a set of equivalence classes we will use $Z/nZ$ or $Z/n$.  

We now consider the map (reduction mod $n$):
$$ Z \rightarrow Z/nZ$$
$$ a \mapsto \bar{a}$$
We can do arithmetic in $Z/nZ$ by defining
$$ \bar{a} + \bar{b} = \overline{a+b}$$
$$ \bar{a} \cdot \bar{b} = \overline{a \cdot b}$$
This is **well-defined**. To form a group we need an inverse for every element, so things become a little bit tricky when we deal with multiplication.

Observation 1:  $(Z/nZ, +)$ is a group. The set of cosets of $nZ$ forms a group under **addition**.  

Observation 2: $Z/nZ$ is a cyclic group generated by $\bar{1}$, i.e. $Z/nZ = \braket{\bar{1}}$. Since all cyclic group of order $n$ are isomorophic, we can see that  
1. there is always a cyclic group of order $n$.  
2. all cyclic group of order $n$ can be written in the form $Z/nZ$, for some $n$.   

Notation: when we use $+$ for group operation, $ng$ means $g+g+...+g$ rather than $g^n$.  

Observation 3: Addition and multiplication on $Z/nZ$ are distributive. This property is inherited from $Z$.  

Remark: $(Z/nZ, \cdot)$ is **not** a group, for $\bar{0}$ cannot possibly have an inverse (the multiplicative identity is $\bar{1}$). But we do have a subset of $Z/nZ$ that gives a group under multiplication, namely:  
$$(Z/nZ)^* = \{\bar{a} \in Z/nZ | \exists \bar{c} \in Z/nZ \text{ such that } \bar{a} \bar{c} = 1 \}$$
This is a group because associativity is inherited from $Z$, identity is $\bar{1}$, inverse is given in the construction.  

To understand $(Z/nZ)^*$ we review gcd.  
If $m,n \in Z$ are not both zero, then
$gcd(m,n) =$ largest positive integer dividing both $m$ and $n$  
Or the unique positive integer $d$ such that  
1. $d|m, d|n$; 
2. If $e|m, e|n$ then $e|d$.  
   
Being positive makes such integer unique.

Lemma: $mZ+nZ = \{mr + ns | r \in Z, s \in Z\} = gcd(m,n) Z$  
Proof: $mZ+nZ$ is a subgroup of $Z$ and thus equals to $dZ$ for some positive interger $d$. Then $m \in dZ, n \in dZ \Rightarrow d|m, d|n$. If $e|m, e|n$, then $e|(mr+ns)$, $mr+ns$ can be $d$ in $dZ$ for some $r,s$, therefore $e|d$. As a result $d = gcd(m,n)$.  

We now use this fact for the following proposition:  
$$ (Z/nZ)^* = \{\bar{a} \in Z/nZ \;|\; gcd(a,n) = 1\}$$
Proof: "$\subset$": $\bar{a} \cdot \bar{c} = \bar{1} \Rightarrow ac = rn + 1 \Rightarrow 1 \in aZ+nZ \Rightarrow gcd(a,n)=1$;  
"$\supset$":By the lemma $aZ + nZ = Z \ni 1$, then there exists some $r,s$ such that 
$$ar + ns = 1 \Rightarrow ar - 1 \in nZ \Rightarrow \bar{a} \cdot \bar{r} = \overline{ar} = \bar{1} \Rightarrow \bar{a} \in (Z/nZ)^*.$$

example 1: $(Z/pZ)^* = \{\bar{1}, \bar{2}, ... \overline{p-1}\}.$  
example 2: more generally $|(Z/p^l Z)^*| = p^l - p^{l-1}$, because 
$$1p,2p,...p^{l-1} p (i.e. 0)$$
are not relative prime to $p$  

Next time we will look at the set of cosets of $H \in G$, denoted $G/H$, when $H$ is a **normal** subgroup of $G$. We'll see that there is a homomorphism
$$f: G \rightarrow G/H$$
with full image, whose kernel equals $H$.  

Today we verified this fact in the case of $Z$ by the map
$$red: Z \rightarrow Z/nZ$$
We showed that this map is a sujective homomorphism with kernel $nZ \triangleleft Z$

# Lec 7
In $Z/nZ$,  
$$\bar{a} = \bar{b} \iff a \equiv b (\text{mod }n) \iff n|(a-b)$$
$Z/nZ = \{\bar{0}, \bar{1}, ... \overline{n-1}\}$ is a cyclic group of order $n$ generated by $\bar{1}$ through "$+$"  

$Z$ and $Z/nZ$ are "rings": "group with multiplication"

**Quotient Groups**
When can we put a group structure on the set of cosets $\{aH\}$ for a subgroup $H \subset G$?  
1. Suppose $H = ker(f)$ for some $f: G \rightarrow G'$ then the set of cosets $\{aH\}$ is in **bijection** with fibers of the map $f$, thus in **bijection** with points $\bar{a}$ in the image $Image(f) \subset G'$  
    But the image of $f$ is a subgroup of $G'$.  
    By transport of structure, we get a group structure, on the set $G/H$ of cosets, with  
    $$\bar{a} \cdot \bar{b} = f(a) \cdot f(b) = f(ab) = \overline{ab}$$
    $$aH \cdot bH = (ab) H$$
    This makes the map
    $$F: G \rightarrow G/H$$
    $$ a \mapsto aH$$
    a serjective group homomorphism. Identity: $H$; Inverses $(aH)^{-1} = a^{-1}H$  

2. More general, we might try $H \subset G$ be any subgroup. Try to define a group structure by setting $aH \cdot bH = (a \cdot b)H$  
   Is it well-defined? By well defined we mean if $aH = a'H, bH = b'H$ is $(ab) H = (a'b')H$?  
   Suppose for some $a \in G,\; aHa^{-1} \ne H$, i.e. $aH \ne Ha$, we are expecting 
   $$ (aH)(a^{-1}H) = (a a^{-1}) H  = H$$
   By hypothesis, $\exists h \in H$ such that $aha^{-1} \notin H$, then we have
   $$aH = (ah)H, a^{-1}H = (a^{-1}e)H \Rightarrow (a a^{-1})H = H \ne (aha^{-1}e)H$$
   Things worked in case 1 because $aHa^{-1} = H$ for all $a \in G$ since that $H$ was a normal subgroup  

3. Assume $H \triangleleft G$ be a normal subgroup, so $aHa^{-1} = H$ for all $a \in G$, i.e. for every $h \in H$ there's $h' \in H$ such that $ah = h'a$. In this case, the naive multiplication law on cosets actually is well-defined and defines a group structure on $G/H$.  
   Check this by calculating the set of all products and using associativity
   $$(aH)(bH) = \{ahbh'\in G | h,h' \in H\} = (Ha)(bH) = H(ab)H = (ab)HH = (ab)H$$

So we can put a **group structure** (naturally inherited from $G$) on the set of all coset $\{ aH \}$ for a subgroup $H \in G$ if and only if $H$ is **normal**.  

We also get a surjective group homomorphism
$$f: G \rightarrow G/H$$
$$a \mapsto aH$$
with kernel $f^{-1}(eH) = H$  

Corollary Every normal subgroup $H \triangleleft G$ is the kernel of a group homomorphism.  

**Isomorphism Theorem**  
If $f: G \rightarrow G'$ is a surjective group homomorphism with kernel $H$, then $f$ induces an **isomorphism**:
$$\bar{f}: G/H \rightarrow G'$$
$$\bar{f}(aH) = f(a)$$
this is well defined since $f(a) = f(a')$ if $a' \in aH$.

Certainly this is surjective -- any $f(b)$ has fiber $bH$; also $\ker(\bar{f})$ = \{\bar{e} = eH\}$.  

Put another way the Isomorphism theorem says that any homomorphism factors through the quotient group by its kernel.
$$G -f\rightarrow G'$$
$$G -F\rightarrow G/\ker -\bar{f}\rightarrow G'$$

**Short exact sequences of groups**
$$1 \rightarrow H -g\rightarrow G -f\rightarrow G' \rightarrow 1$$
$f$ and $g$ are group homomorphisms with  
1. $f$ injective
2. $g$ surjective
3. Image$(g) = \ker(f)$  

Isomorphism theorem says then 
$$G' \rightarrow^{\sim} G/H$$

**Warning**  
$H$ and $G'$ do not determine the group $G$.  
Example:
$$ 1 \rightarrow A_3 \rightarrow S_3 \rightarrow \{\pm 1\} \rightarrow 1$$
$$ 1 \rightarrow Z/3Z \rightarrow Z/6Z \rightarrow Z/2Z \rightarrow 1$$
Two $H$ and $G'$ are isomorphic but $G$ has different structure.  

# Lec 8
$G \supset K \triangleright H$, $H$ be normal subgroup of $G$, then $H$ is normal in $K$.  
$G -f\rightarrow G/H$ = quotient group (the coset of $H$)  
$a \mapsto aH$  
1. $H$ is normal in $K$; so have group $K/H \subset G/H$, i.e. $K/H$ is a **subgroup** of $G/H$! The cosets $\subset K$ are stable under multiplication as $K$ is stable under multiplication.  
2. Conversely, any subgroup of $G$ containing $H$ corresponds to a subgroup of $G/H$ in this manner.
   $$K = \bigcup_{\text{cosets corresp. to subgroup}} aH = f^{-1}(\text{subgroup of } G/H) \subset G$$
   there's a bijection between the subgroup of $G$ containing normal subgroup and the subgroup of the quotient group.  
   $$\{\text{subgroups of }G \text{ containing }H\} \leftrightarrow \{\text{subgroups of } G/H\}$$  

Example $Z \supset K \supset pZ$. $K$ is a subgroup, then either $K = Z$ or $K=pZ$. Because such $K$ gives a subgroup of the cyclic quotient group $Z/pZ$.  

**Vector Spaces over a Field**  
Definition: Set $F$ with two operations $+,\times$ such that  
1. $F$ is an Abelian group under $+$  
2. $F^*  = F - \{0\}$ is an Abelian group under $\times$  
3. $+, \times$ distribute. $a(b+c) = ab+ac$.  

$F' \subset F$ subfield if closed under $+,\times$ inverse, etc.  
Example: $Q \subset R \subset C$  

At the very least
$F \supset \{0,1\}$ (we always assume $0 \ne 1$)  

The simpliest field $Z/2Z$  
More generally, if $p$ is a prime number, $Z/pZ$ with the multiplication inherited from $Z$ is a **field**. To show that it is a field, we must show that if $a !\equiv 0(\text{mod } p)$, then there is an integer $b$ such that $ab \equiv 1 (\text{mod }p)$. This is because $pZ \subset pZ+aZ = Z$ by the example of $Z \supset K \supset pZ$.   
Warning: $Z/nZ$ is not a field if $n$ is composite.  
Warning: $Z/pZ$ is not a subfield of $C$. $p1 = 0$ in $Z/pZ$ while $p1 = 1$ in $C$.  

Questions(Galois): What are the finite fields beyond $Z/pZ$? What is the order |F|?  
Answer: For each prime $p$ and $n \ge 1$, there is a unique field $F$ or order $p^n$ (up to isomorphism).  

Definition: A **vector space** over a **field** $F$ is a set $V$ with 
1. $V$ is an Abelian group under $+$, identity $0_v$
2. There is a scalar product $F \times V \rightarrow V$ by $(c,v) \mapsto c \cdot v$;   
   $1 \cdot v = v$;   
   $(ab)v = a(bv)$;  
   $(a+b)v = av + bv$;  
   $a(v+w) = av + aw$;

Example of $V/F$:
1. $\{0_v\}$;  
2. $F$;  
3. $F^n$;  
4. $F[x] := \{\text{all polynomials } p(x) \text{ with coeffients in } F\}$

Let $T:V \rightarrow W$ be a homomorphism between vectorspace (liner transformation)  
$T(v+w) = Tv + Tw$  
$T(c \cdot v) = c \cdot Tv$ (scalar multiplications in $V$ and $W$ respectively)  
$\ker T$ is a subspace of $V$  
$\text{Image }T$ is a subspace of $W$  

$W \subset V$ defines a **quotient space** $V/W$ has structure of a vector space over $F$, and a natural map $f: V \rightarrow V/W$ is a linear transformation with kernel $W$. ($V$ Abelian thus normal, all group theories go into vector space)  

# Lec 9
Spans, linear independence, bases  
Convention $S = \empty$, Span of $S = \{0\} \subset V$, $\dim \{0\} = 0$  

def linear comb, def span(subspace), def finite dim, def li, def basis, span->basis, li->basis  

A basis gives rise to an isomorphism of vectorspaces
$$V -f\rightarrow F^n$$
$$f(w) = (a_1, ... a_n), w = a_1v_1 + ...a_nv_n$$
is the unique expansion on given basis.  
Easily to verify it is a homomorphism of vectorspaces.  
onto $\leftrightarrow$ spans; 1-to-1 $\leftrightarrow$ linearly independent.  
This also shows a 1-to-1 correspondence(bijection) between a basis and a isomorphism from $V$ to $F^n$

Main Theorem: If $S=\{v_1...v_n\}$ spans $V$ and $L=\{w_1...w_m\}$ linearly independent, then $n \ge m$.  
Corollary:  bases have the same order = $\dim V$, #S >= dim V, #li <= dim V

Proposition  Suppose $W \subset V$ be finite dimensional and $\{w_1, w_2...w_m\}$ is a basis for $W$. Then we may extend this to a basis for $V$  
$W \subset V$ gives a vector space homomorphism $f: V \rightarrow V/W$, a quotient vector space.  
Ordered set $(f(v_{m+1}),f(v_{m+2}),...f(v_n))$ gives a basis for $V/W$.  
Hence, $\dim V = \dim W + \dim V/W$  
$W'$ the span of $\{v_{m+1},...v_{n}\}$ is a subspace of $V$ mapping isomorphically to $V/W$.

This is not true for general group.
$$Z/2Z \sim H = 2Z/4Z \subset G = Z/4Z$$
There is no $H' \subset G$ mapping isomorphically to $G/H$, because the only non-trivial subgroup is $H$ and $H$ maps to $0$ in $G/H$.  
However, in vector space, because the exsitence of basis, you can find a subspace that lifts  $V/W$.  

# Lec 10
1. $W = span\{v_1...v_m\}$, $W' = span\{v_{m+1}...v_{n}\}$ then $\exists$ a linear isomorphism 
   $$W \times W' = \{(w,w') : w \in W, w' \in W'\} \simeq \varphi \rightarrow V$$
   proved by $W \cap W' = \{0\}$, showing linear and bijective.

2. If $W \subset V$ then $\exists$ another $W' \subset V$ such that 
   $$ W' \rightarrow V \rightarrow(\text{canonical quotient}) V/W$$ 
   the composition map is an isomorphism.

3. For $W \subset V$ subspace, $V \simeq \rightarrow W \times V/W$ by 1 and 2, which shows
   $$\dim V = \dim W + \dim V/W$$  

4. If $f:V \rightarrow U$ is a linear transformation, then 
   $$ V \simeq \rightarrow \ker(f) \times \text{Im}(f)$$
   because $\bar{f}: V/\ker(f) \simeq \rightarrow \text{Im}(f)$ by $v + \ker(f) \mapsto f(v)$ is an isomorphism.  

General Problem for Groups  
Given $f:G \rightarrow G'$, find $\ker(f)$ and $\text{Im}(f)$, it's generally difficult. But we can solve for vector spaces by bases, matrices, matrix algorithms.  


Some Correspondences
1. We saw last lecture one basis of $V$ corresponds to a linear isomorphism from $V$ to $F^n$. This is actually 1-to-1 correspondence by
   $$\{\text{ordered bases of } V\} \leftrightarrow \{ \text{linear isomorphism } F^n \rightarrow V\}$$
   $$B = (v_1,...v_n) \mapsto \rho_B: F^n \rightarrow V;\; (a_1...a_n) \mapsto a_1 v_1+...+a_n v_n$$
   $$\rho \mapsto (\rho(1,0..0), ... \rho(0...0,1))$$

2. Basic Linear Algebra  
   $$\{ \text{Linear Transformation } F^n \rightarrow F^m\} \leftrightarrow M_{m \times n}(F)$$
   $$ f \mapsto [f] = (f(e_1),...f(e_n))$$
   $$A \mapsto f: F^n \rightarrow F^m $$

3. Correspondences 1 and 2 together  
   Given $f : V \rightarrow V'$ a linear tranformation with dimension $n,m$, basis $B,B'$ respectively.  
   We have matrix of $f$ with respect to $B,B'$,
   $$[f]_{B}^{B'} = [\rho_{B'}^{-1} f \rho_B]$$
   $$ F^n -\rho_B \rightarrow V - f \rightarrow V' - \rho_{B'}^{-1}\rightarrow F^m$$
   Explicitly if $B = (v_1...v_n); B' = (w_1,...w_m)$  
   $f(v_j) = \sum_i^{m} a_{ij} w_i;\; [f]_{B}^{B'}=(a_{ij})$  
   $Hom(V,V')=\{\text{linear transf. } V \rightarrow V'\} \simeq \rightarrow M_{m \times n}(F)$  
   The correspondence is shown by addition, multiplication and composition.  

**Change of Basis**  
Suppose $V -- B_1, B_2;\; V' -- B_1', B_2'$
$$[f]_{B_2}^{B_2'} = [\rho_{B_2'}^{-1} f \rho_{B_2}] = [\rho_{B_2'}^{-1} \rho_{B_1'} \rho_{B_1'}^{-1} f \rho_{B_1} \rho_{B_1}^{-1} \rho_{B_2}] = [\rho_{B_2'}^{-1} \rho_{B_1'}] \; [f]_{B_1}^{B_1'} \; [\rho_{B_1}^{-1} \rho_{B_2}]$$ 
$[\rho_{B_1}^{-1} \rho_{B_2}]$ is called a change of basis matrix.  
If $V = V'$
$$[f]_{B_2}^{B_2} = [\rho_{B_2}^{-1} \rho_{B_1}] \; [f]_{B_1}^{B_1} \; [\rho_{B_1}^{-1} \rho_{B_2}] = [\rho_{B_1}^{-1} \rho_{B_2}]^{-1} \; [f]_{B_1}^{B_1} \; [\rho_{B_1}^{-1} \rho_{B_2}] = P^{-1} [f]_{B_1}^{B_1} P$$
Let $B_1 = (v_1,...v_n)$ and $B_2 = (w_1,...w_n)$ then
$$[\rho_{B_1}^{-1} \rho_{B_2}] = (c_{ij}) \quad \text{ where } w_{j} = \sum_{i=1}^n c_{ij}v_i$$
Similarity can be viewed as conjugation of matrices

**GL(V)**  
Let $V$ be vectorspace, $GL(V)$ is defined to the set of all **linear** isomorphisms from $V$ to $V$. This is sort of the analog of group automorphism except we demand preserving scalar multiplication. $GL(V) \subset Aut(V)$ in the sense of a group.  
$$\begin{aligned}
Aut(V,+) \supset GL(V) :&= \{\text{lin. iso } V \rightarrow V\} \\
&= \{\text{invertible lin transf } V \rightarrow V\} \\
&= Hom(V,V)^*
\end{aligned}$$
By star we mean invertible.  
Given a basis $B$ of $V$, we can rewrite this 
$$Hom(V,V)^* \simeq \rightarrow \{\text{invertible matrices in } M_{n \times n}(F)\} \simeq \rightarrow GL_n(F)$$

# Lec 11  
$V,W$ be finite dimensional vectorspaces over the field $F$, linear operator
$$T: V \rightarrow W$$
is just a homo in the language of vectorspaces, preserving addition and scalar multiplication.  

Example: $V = F[x], deg \le n;\quad W = F[x], deg \le n-1;\quad T = \frac{d}{dx}:V \rightarrow W$ is a linear operator works for any field.  Total derivative is a linear map. When $F$ is finite field $Z/pZ$, notice that $Tx^p = px^{p-1} = 0$, non-trivial kernel, therefore $Im(T) \nsupseteq x^{p-1}$   

**Dimension formula**:
$$\dim V = \dim \ker T + \dim \text{Im}\;T$$
Proof: construct a basis for $\ker T$ in $V$ then extend it to a basis of $V$. Apply the operator on the extended part, then it becomes a basis for $Im\;T$ by showing they span and they are linearly independent.  

Corollary:  If $V$ is finite dimentional vectorspace and $W \subset V$, then $\dim W + \dim V/W = \dim V$.  
Proof: There's a natural homomorphism $f: V \rightarrow V/W$ which is surjective with kernel $W$.  

**Matrices**
$$ F^n -\rho_B \rightarrow V - T \rightarrow W - \rho_{B'}^{-1}\rightarrow F^m$$
$T(v_j) = \sum_{i=1}^m a_{ij}w_i \quad j=1,...n$ where $a_{ij}$ is determined by $T$ and choice of bases. Conversely, theses scalars determine T: $Tv = T(\sum_{j=1}^n x_j v_j) = \sum_{j=1}^n x_j \sum_{i=1}^m a_{ij}w_i = \sum_{i=1}^m y_i w_i$ where $y_i = \sum_{j=1}^n x_j a_{ij}$ or $\textbf{y} = A\textbf{x}$  

Suppose $V:\{v_1,...v_n\}$  
$T: V \rightarrow V$ an endomorphism  
$A$ be matrix of $T$ with respect to given basis of $V$, i.e. $n \times n$ matrix. Consider  $V -T_A\rightarrow V -S_B\rightarrow V$ Composition of such linear operator $S_B \cdot T_A: V \rightarrow V$ has matrix $B \cdot A$.  
Proposition: The following are equivalent for $T: V \rightarrow V$  
1. $T$ is an isomorphism(automorphism) of vectorspace  
2. $\ker T = \{0_v\}$  
3. $\text{Im }T = V$
4. If the matrix $A$ of $T$ with respect to $\{v_1...v_n\}$ is $A$ then $A$ is invertible as an $n \times n$ matrix.  
5. $\det A \ne 0$ in $F$.  

$GL(V)$ := {$T: V \rightarrow V$ which are also isomorphism} $\simeq \rightarrow GL_n(F)$ with some choice of basis.  

Example: $F = Z/2Z$ What is the group of $GL_2(F)$? 6 out of 16 such $2 \times 2$ matrices are invertible. In fact, $GL_2(F) \simeq \rightarrow S_3$. We can see this as an automorphism of set on $\{(1,0),(0,1),(1,1)\}$

Remark:  The advantage of the $(V,T)$ point of view over the $(F^n,A)$ point of view is by choosing a **convenient basis** we can get a simpler form for the operator, i.e. $\begin{bmatrix} I_r & 0 \\ 0 & 0 \end{bmatrix}$.  

Suppose, though, we're constrained to choose a single basis for domain and target, this brings us to theorey of eigenvalues and eigenvectors.  

# Lec 12  
$T: V \rightarrow V$  
To find a good basis that the matrix $A$ of $T$ is in simple form, we introduce invariant subspace $W \subset V$, i.e. subspace such that $T(W) \subset W$ Then we can write $A$ in the form $\begin{bmatrix} A_1 & A_2 \\ 0 & A_3 \end{bmatrix}$ where $A_1$ is the matrix of $T: W \rightarrow W$. If we have an invariant complement $W' \subset V$ i.e. $V = W \oplus W';\; T(W) \subset W;\; T(W') \subset W'$ then can write $A$ in the form $\begin{bmatrix} A_1 & 0 \\ 0 & A_2 \end{bmatrix}$. If $W$ is 1-dimensional, i.e. $W = Fw = \{cw:c\in F\}$ is invariant, or equivalently, $Tw = cw$ for some $c \in F$, then say $w$ is an **eigenvector** and $c$ is an **eigenvalue**.  

If there is a basis $\{v_1..v_n\}$ of $V$ consisting of eigenvectors, with $Tv_i = c_i v_i$, then $A = diag\{c_1...c_n\}$.  

**Cannot always** write $A$ in diagonal form, i.e. cannot always find basis of eigenvectors:  
Example 1: rotation matrix $\begin{bmatrix} \cos \theta & -\sin \theta \\ \sin \theta & \cos \theta \end{bmatrix}$ has no eigenvectors $v \ne 0$ in $R^2$.  
Example 2: $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$ $T(ae_1 + be_2) = ae_1 + b(e_1 + e_2) = ace_1 + bce_2 \Rarr a+b=ac;\;b=bc$

Given $T$, what are the possible eigenvalues $c$?  
If $Tw = cw$ i.e. $(T-cI)w = 0$ i.e. $w \in \ker(T-cI)$ then $T-cI$ is not invertible.  
Conversely, if $T-cI$ has non-trivial kernel (or just is not invertible) then $c$ is an eigenvalue for $T$.  

Conclusion: set of eigenvalues = $\{ c\in F:\; T-cI \text{ is not invertible}\}$ = $\{c \in F:\; \det(A-cI) = 0\}$ where $A$ is the matrix of $T$ w.r.t. some basis.

Consider the determinant  
$f(t) := \det(tI-A) = t^n - (a_{11} + a_{22} + ... + a_{nn})t +... + (-1)^n \det(A)$  
is a polynomial of degree $n$ with coefficients in the field $F$, which is called the **characteristic polynomial** of $T$. It depends **only on** $T$, not on the basis of $V$ that is used to obtain the matrix $A$, i.e. unchanged when you conjugate with an invertible matrix.  

The roots of the characteristic polynomial are exactly the eigenvalues of $T$.  

Lemma: If polynomial $f(t)$ has degree $n$ over field $F$, then it has at most $n$ distinct roots $c$ in $F$. Proved by division algorithm $f(t) = (t-c)g(t)+d$ where $d \in F$ and $g$ has degree $n-1$ and induction.  

Note: we need to be careful with the field. $F = Z/8Z$ and $f(x) = x^2-1$ then 4 distinct roots $\{1,3,5,7\}$  

Theorem $T: V \rightarrow V$ gives a vector in $Hom(V,V)$, which is an $F$-vectorspace of $\dim n^2$ then the $\{I,T,T^2...T^{n^2}\}$ with $n^2+1$ vectors must have a linear relation
$$a_0 I + a_1T + ... + a_{n^2} T^{n^2} = 0$$
so $T$ satisfies a polynomial of degree $\le n^2$ with coefficients in $F$.  

**Cayley-Hamilton Theorem**  
$T$ always satisfies its own characteristic polynomial (of degree $n$).  
Proved by Jordan form.  

# Lec 13  
Some subgroup of the general linear group we will introduce:
$$SO_n(F) \triangleleft_2 O_n(F) \subset GL_n(F)$$
$F$ can be any group. $SO_n(F)$ is non-trivial normal subgroup if $1 \ne -1$ in $F$.  
When $F = R$ this is related to Euclidean Geometry.  

To define the subgroup, put additional structure on $V = F^n$, called inner product (bilinear form)
$$<v,w> \in F;\; \text{ if } v = (a_1...a_n), w = (b_1..b_n), \braket{v,w} = a_1b_1+...+a_nb_n$$
Let $O_n(F) = \{A \in GL_n(F): \braket{Av,Aw} = \braket{v,w}, \forall v,w \in V\}$, we check if $O_n(F)$ is actually a subgroup of $GL_n(F)$.  

$$\braket{Ae_i, Ae_j} = \delta_{ij} \iff A^tA=I \iff A^t = A^{-1}$$

$SO_n(F) := \{ A \in O_n(F): \det A = +1\} =$ kernel of a homomorphism $O_n(F) -\det \rightarrow \{ \pm 1\}$.  

Claim: The permutation matrices are in $O_n(F)$ this gives injective homomorphism
$$\begin{matrix} 
S_n & \rightarrow & O_n(F) \\
\triangledown & & \triangledown\\
A_n & \rightarrow &SO_n(F)
\end{matrix}$$
if $1 \ne -1 \in F$. Now take $F = R, \braket{v,v} = \sum a_i^2 \ge 0$ (this makes sense specifically because we are working in $R$) and $\braket{v,v} = 0 \iff v=0$.  
$||v|| = \sqrt{\braket{v,v}}$ is the positive square root, called "norm" or "length" of $v$.  

**Cauchy-Schwartz Inequality**  
$$-1 \le \frac{\braket{v,w}}{||v||\,||w||} \le 1$$
So $\exists \theta \in [0,\pi]$ such that $\cos \theta = \frac{\braket{v,w}}{||v||\,||w||}$, which is called the angle between $v$ and $w$.  

$O_n(R)$ acts linearly on $R^n$ and **preserves length and angles**, i.e. preserves **Euclidean geometry** of $R^n$.  

# Lec 14  
$F$ be a field.  
$O_n(F) \subset GL_n(F) =$ Automorphism group of vectorspaces $F^n$ with vector space structure.  
$O_n(F)$ is the set preserving the inner product $\braket{v,w} = \sum_1^n v_i w_i$, which can be described as $\{A : A^tA = I\}$ or $\{A:A^{-1} = A^t\}$. $\det(A)^2 = 1 \Rightarrow x^2-1=0$ has at most 2 roots in $F$, namely $+1$ and $-1$.  
If $1 \ne -1$ in $F$, $SO_n(F) \triangleleft O_n(F)$.  

For $F=R$:  
If $A$ preserves inner product $\braket{v,w}$, it always preserves the Euclidean norm $||v|| = \sqrt{\braket{v,v}} = \sqrt{\sum v_i^2} \ge 0$ and angle $\theta$ s.t. $\cos \theta = \frac{\braket{v,w}}{||v||\;||w||}$.  

General $F$:  
If $v$ is an eigenvector for $A \in O_n(F)$ with eigenvalue $\lambda \in F$, $Av = \lambda v$ and $\braket{v,v} \ne 0$, then $\lambda^2 = 1$, i.e. $\lambda = \pm 1$  
Proof: $\braket{v,v} = \braket{Av,Av} = \braket{\lambda v, \lambda v} = \lambda^2 \braket{v,v}$.  

What do tranformations $A$ in $SO(2)$ look like? rotation!  
$||e_1|| = ||e_2|| = 1, e_1 \perp e_2$  
$||Ae_1|| = ||Ae_2|| = 1, Ae_1 \perp Ae_2, \det{A} = 1$  
For $||\cdot||$ and $\perp$ we know that there are two choices and $\det$ decides the one.  
$\text{rot}(\theta) \circ \text{rot}(\phi) = \text{rot}(\theta + \phi)$  
Have isomorphism of abelian group  
$SO(2) - f \rightarrow \{z \in C^* : |z| = 1\}$  
$A = \text{rot}(\theta) \mapsto z = e^{i \theta} = f(e_1)$  
**warning** $O(2)$ is **not** Abelian.  

What are the transformation $A \in O(2)$ but $A \notin SO(2)$?  
Answer: Each such $A has two orthogonal eigenvectors $v_1, v_2$ such that  
$Av_1 = v_1, \; Av_2 = -v_2.\; A = \begin{bmatrix} +1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1\end{bmatrix}$ with respect to $(v_1, v_2)$  
Proof: Charateristic Polynomial $x^2 - tr(A)x - 1=0$ determinnant is necessrily $-1$ for $A \in O(2) - SO(2)$. We claim this has both real roots, otherwise, the determinant $z\bar{z} \ge 0$ which cannot be $-1$. The contradiction shows that real roots $\lambda_1 \lambda_2 = -1$. But these are eigenvalues for $A$ and so $\lambda_1 = \pm 1, \lambda_2 = -\lambda_1$. $\braket{v_1,v_2} = \braket{Av_1,Av_2} = \braket{v_1,-v_2} = -\braket{v_1,v_2}$ therefore $\braket{v_1,v_2} = 0$, eigenvectors are orthogonal.   

As a result, $A$ looks like the reflection around the $Rv_1$ line.  

Note: $Refl(v_1) \circ Refl(v_2) = Rot(\theta)$.  

**Euler's Theorem**  
Any $A \in SO(3)$ has an eigenvalue of $+1$ so there is a $v \in R^3$, $Av = v$.  
In Euler's terminology: Any motion preserving $S^2 \subset R^3$  has an axis of rotation if it preserves orientation( i.e. with determinant 1).  
Proof: $f(x)$ has degree 3, so 3 roots in $C$, 1 real 2 complexes or 3 reals. We know $\Pi$ roots is $+1$. real eigenvalues can only be $\pm 1$ thus there must be a $+1$.  

We claim that $A$ preservs the plane perpendicular to $v: Av=v$. If we take $v$ as the first vector, and extend it to an orthogonal basis $\{v,e_1,e_2\}$ for $R^3$, then $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & B\end{bmatrix}$. $B$ is orthogonal transformation, something preserving inner product on the span of $\{e_1,e_2\}$ so it is an element of $SO(2)$. But we know the elements of $SO(2)$, they are all of the form $rot(\theta)$. So $A$ just rotates around $Rv$ by some angle $\theta$. 

**Rigid Motion**   
All motions $R^n \rightarrow R^n$ which  preserves the distance between any two points
$$d(v,w) = ||v - w||$$
are called **rigid motions**. Here motion just means function.  
Claim: If $m$ is a rigid motion and $m(0) = 0$ then $m$ is a linear transformation in $O(n)$.  
Proof: *Preserving inner product*, i.e. $\braket{m(v),m(w)} = \braket{v,w}$ because 
$$||v-w||^2 = \braket{v-w, v-w} = ||v-0||^2 + ||w-0||^2 - 2 \braket{v,w}$$
preserving the three terms of distance therefore preserving the inner product. We also need to show that $m$ is *linear*.  

At the very least, the above shows $O(n) \subset G =$ group of rigid motions.  

Another subgroup of $G$: **Translation** by a fixed vector $b$. This subgroup is isomorphic to $R^n$ under addition.  

One can show:
$G =$ the group of rigid motion $= R^n \cdot O(n)$ in the sense that any rigid motion can be written uniquely as the composite of a translation with an element of $O(n)$. $m \in G$ has the form $m(v)=Av + b$ because $t_{-b} \circ m (0) = 0$ which is a rigid motion preservs the origin, therefore $t_{-b} \circ m(v) = Av, m(v) = Av+b$.  

Note: this copy of $R^n$ is normal in $G$.  

# Lec 15  
$G = R \circ G_0$ where $G_0$ is the motion that preserves the origin. We claim $G_0 \simeq O(n)$ is the group of orthogonal transformation.  

It is obvious that $O(n) \subset G_0$ because it preserves $0$ and inner product, so they preserve the distance $d(v,w) = \sqrt{\braket{v-w,v-w}}$.  

We have shown that $G_0$, the zero and distance preserving rigid motions preserve inner product, now we try to show they are linear.  
take $e_1...e_n$ an orthogonal basis for $R^n$, then for any $m \in G_0$, $m(e_1),...,m(e_n)$ is also an orthogonal basis for $R^n$, and we construct a matrix/transformation $A = [m(e_1) \; ...\; m(e_n)]$ and consider the tranformation $m' = A^{-1} \circ m$. Obviously $m'(e_i) = e_i$, but for general $m'(v)$ we consider the coordinate 
$$a_i = \braket{m'(v), e_i} = \braket{m'(v), m'(e_i)} = \braket{v,e_i}$$
by preserving inner-product. Therefore we have $m'(v) = v$, $m'$ is an identity tranformation, $G_0 = A$.  

Note: In decomposition, $G = R^n \cdot O(n)$ where $O(n) \simeq G_0$
$$(b,A)(b',A')(v) = (b,A)(A'v+b') = A(A'v+b')+b = (b+A(b'), AA')(v)$$
So $G$ is not product of $R^n$ and $O(n)$, but a sort of twisted product.  

$f:G \rightarrow O(n)$ by $(b,A) \mapsto A$ is a surjective homomorphism with kernel $\{(b,I)\} \simeq R^n$. Therefore $R^n$ is a **normal subgroup** of $G$.  

We get a very rich theorey already in $n=2$ case $G = R^2 \cdot O(2)$, $G_0 = O(2) = SO(2) \cup (SO(2) \cdot r_l)$, where $r_l$ has order $2$(meaning $r_l^{-1} = r_l$), representing a reflection across a line through the origin.  

For the multiplication structure of $O(2)$, we need to compute $r_l \circ rot(\theta) \circ r_l^{-1}$ it must be some $rot(\theta ')$ because of the det. It turns out that $\theta' = -\theta$ if we take some point on $l$. This makes $O(2)$ has interesting structure: $SO(2)$ is a normal subgroup(Abelian), any element in $SO(2) \cdot r_l$ is some $r_m$, when you conjugate $h \in H$ with anything outside $H$ you get $rhr^{-1} = h^{-1}$. Now we have a nice description of $G_0 = O(2)$ in terms of $SO(2)$ and any fixed reflection.  

The map $G=R^2 \cdot O(2) \rightarrow O(2) \rightarrow \{\pm 1\}$ determining orientation. Thus any $g \in G$ is one of $4$ types, geometrically:
$$\det g = +1 \text{ (orientation preserving)}; t_b \circ rot(\theta)$$
1. translation $t_b$ fix no points (or all points if $b=0$);
2. fix a single point $p$ and consist of rotation around $p$
   
$$\det G = -1 \text{ (orientation reversing)}; t_b \circ rot(\theta) \circ ref(l)$$
3. reflection on a line $refl(l)$  
4. glide reflection $refl(l)(v) + b$ but fix a line $b \parallel l$ (not pointwise but as a set) 

Breakdown of case 2:  
1 is the case where $\theta = 0$;  
2 is the case where $\theta \ne 0$.  
When $\theta \ne 0, b = 0$ then $p = 0$ and $g \in G_0 = O(2)$, $\det g = 1$ so $g \in SO(2)$.  
When $\theta \ne 0, b \ne 0$, we can find, by geomotry a point fixed and prove that other points are rotated. ($p = (A-I)^{-1}b$ unique)  

Composing case 2 of $p$ and case 2 of $q \ne p$ we get another case 2 of $p'$ because the subgroup is closed under composition, and $p$ is not fixed.

After studying individual elements we now make a study of **finite subgroup** $\Gamma$ of $G = R^2 \cdot O(2)$. $\Gamma$ contains no translation because otherwise we would keep marching out.  

Theorem: Any finite $\Gamma$ fixes a point $p \in R^2$ (every element fixes the same point).  
If $p = 0$, $\Gamma_0 \subset O(2)$.  
Generally $\Gamma_p \subset G_p \subset p$ where $G_p = t_p G_0 t_p^{-1}$ and $\Gamma^* = t_p^{-1} \Gamma_p t_p \subset G_0 = O(2)$ (conjugation is isomorphism)

Abstract recipe for fixed point $p$.

Let $s \in R^2$ then $\{\gamma(s): \gamma \in \Gamma\}$ is a finite set in $R^2$. Let $n$ be the number of elements in $\Gamma$, and the point 
$$p = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{\gamma \in \Gamma} \gamma(s)$$
is claimed to be a fixed point.  
Proof.  For any $g \in G$, want to show $g(p) = \frac{1}{n} \sum_\gamma g\gamma(s)$. This holds if we consider translation and $O(2)$ seperately and compose them to be $g$. Then let $g = \gamma'$ we have $\gamma'(p) = \frac{1}{n} \sum_\gamma \gamma'\gamma(s)$ and $\gamma'\gamma$ is a permutation/rearrangement of all elements in $\Gamma$ thus $\gamma'(p) = \frac{1}{n} \sum_\gamma \gamma(s) = p$ for any $\gamma' \in \Gamma$.  

Note: Finite subgroup of $G$, $\Gamma_p$ is isomorphic to $\Gamma_0 \subset O(2)$ by $t_p^{-1} \Gamma_p t_p$. So we only study $\Gamma_0$. However, this does **not** hold for **discrete** subgroup.

Classify finite $\Gamma \subset O(2)$.  
1. $\Gamma \subset O(2)$ when $\det(\Gamma) = 1$
2. $\Gamma \cap O(2) = \Gamma_+$ has index 2 in $\Gamma$ as its normal subgroup, when $\det(\Gamma) = \pm 1$ and $-1$ is achieved by some elements.  

Case 1, every $\gamma = rot(\theta),\; 0 \le \theta < 2\pi$. Let $\theta$ be the smallest angle of rotation, for $\gamma \in \Gamma, \theta > 0$. Then we claim $\Gamma$ is a cyclic group generated by $\gamma$. If $|\Gamma| = n$, $\theta = 2\pi/n$. Proved by Euclidean Algorithm. Therefore $\Gamma$ is cyclic and all orders occur.  

Case 2, $\Gamma_+$ is cyclic of order $n$, so $\Gamma$ has order $2n$. $\Gamma - \Gamma_+$ has elements $r = refl(l), r^2 = 1$. Moreover, $rhr^{-1} = rhr = h^{-1}$. Then we get $\Gamma = \braket{rot(\frac{2\pi}{n}), r}$, which is called dihedral group with order $2n$, denotes $D_{2n}$, when $n \ge 3$ they are non-Abelian. $S_3 \simeq D_6$  

# Lec 16
$D_{12}$ has $\braket{rot(\pi/3)}$ as its normal subgroup and contains reflections by line connecting two opposite vertices or two oppisite sides' midpoints. They form two conjugacy classes.    
$D_6$ however, the $\Gamma - \Gamma_+$ contains reflections by lines going through a vertex and its oppisite side. They are all of the same types, in fact, they are all conjugate.  
$D_4 \simeq K_4$.  
$D_{2n}$ is non-Ablelian for $n \ge 3$.  
$D_{2n} \subset S_n$ it permutes the vectices of n-gon.

When $n$ is odd, elements of $\Gamma - \Gamma_+$ are all conjugate in $\Gamma$, when $n$ is even, the elements form two conjugacy classes.  

More generally, we want to classify the **discrete** subgroup $\Gamma \subset G$.  
In $G = R^2 \cdot O(2)$ discrete means $\Gamma$ does not contain arbitrarily small rotations or tranlations, i.e. $\exists \epsilon > 0$ so that $\forall t_b \in \Gamma, |b|\ge \epsilon, \forall rot(\theta) \in \Gamma,  |\theta| \ge \epsilon$.
In general, $\gamma = t_b \circ A$, discrete means $|b| \ge \epsilon$ and $A$ is not arbitrarily close to $I$ element-wise.  

A simple example of an infinite discrete subgroup:  
Let $b \ne 0$ in $R^n$, $\Gamma = \text{cyclic group generated by }t_b$.  

Let $\Gamma$ be a discrete subgroup of $G$, and we consider 
1. $L = \Gamma \cap R^2 = \{t_b \in \Gamma\}$
2. Image $\bar{\Gamma}$ of $\Gamma$ in $O(2) = G/R^2$ as a quotient group, by a homomorphism that kills $t_b$ in $\gamma$. $\bar{\Gamma} = \Gamma/L$ is finite 

What are the possiblity for $L$?
1. $L = \{0\}$, $\Gamma$ is finite, equal to $\bar{\Gamma}$.  
2. $L = Zb$, $b \ne 0$ in $R^2$ 
3. $L = Za + Zb$ where $a$ and $b$ are linearly independent over $R$ in $R^2$, i.e. $a,b$ give a basis (this case is called a lattice)  

1 trivial. 2 Euclidean algorithm.  
3 proved by construction and EA.  
Pick $b_0 \ne 0$ shortest on its line and $a$ linearly independent of $b_0$, in the parallelogram formed by $a,b_0$ there are only finite number of points because of **compactness**. Then we choose the closest point to $a$ and denotes $b$. Then $Za+Zb$ can represent all points by EA: $(na+ra + mb+sb) \rightarrow ra+sb$ is in parallelogram contradiction to the choice of $b$.  

Now consider image $\bar{\Gamma}$ of $\Gamma$ in $O(2)$  
Lemma: $\bar{\Gamma}$ **preserves** the subgroup $L \subset R^2$.  
Proof.  If $b \in L$, i.e. $t_b \in \Gamma$, say $\bar{\gamma} \in \bar{\Gamma}$ and lift it to $\gamma \in \Gamma$ which also $\in O(2) \subset G$, consider
$$\gamma t_b \gamma^{-1}$$
it's in $\Gamma$ and it's a translation (by normal group) then consider its operation on $0$ we get $\gamma t_b \gamma^{-1} = t_{\gamma(b)}$ and therefore $\gamma(b) \in L$.  

If $L = \{0\}$ Then $\bar{\Gamma} = C_n \text{ or } D_{2n}$ for some $n \ge 1$ and any such is possible.  
But suppose we are in case 3, then $L = Za + Zb$ ($a,b$ linearly independent) Then $\bar{\Gamma} = C_n$ or $D_{n}$ with $n = 1,2,3,4,6$ (#$\bar{\Gamma} \le 12$).  
Proof.  $A \in \bar{\Gamma}$ be a rotation, want to show the order of $A$ is $1,2,3,4$ or $6$. Consider the characteristic polynomial of $A$, $x^2 - tr(A)x+1$, $tr(A)^2-4 \le 0$ with seting basis $a,b$ we have A as an integer matrix therefore $tr(A) \in Z$ as a result $tr(A) = \pm 2, \pm 1, 0$ corresponding to order $3,6; 1,2; 4$  respectively.  

# Lec 17  
If $L = \{0\}$, $\bar{\Gamma} = \Gamma = C_n \text{ or } D_{2n}, n \ge 1$.  
If $L = Zb$, then $\bar{\Gamma} = C_1, C_2, D_2, D_4 = K_4$.  
Because for any $\gamma \in \bar{\Gamma}$, $\gamma(b) = \pm b$ (disance preserving)  
If $L = Za+Zb$, $\bar{\Gamma} = C_n, D_{2n}$ for $n = 1,2,3,4,6$.  
Proof. If $\gamma \in \Gamma$ is a rotation, charac poly $f(x) = x^2 - 2 \cos(\theta) x + 1;\; |2\cos \theta| \le 2$ But matrix A of $\gamma$ with basis $a,b$is integral. so implies that $2 \cos \theta = \pm 1, \pm 2, 0$

What is the classification of $L$ in $R^2$. (to determine what $\bar{\Gamma}$ can be )  
Changing $L$ to $A L$ with $A \in O(2)$ just conjugates $\bar{\Gamma} = Aut(L)$ by $A$, i.e. $A \bar{\gamma} A^{-1}$ action on $AL$ preserves the structure. Changing $L$ to $c \cdot L$ does not change $\bar{\Gamma}$, $c \in R^*$.

L are equivalent up to action of $O(2)$ and scalar multiplication $R^*$ on $R^2$. Then we can make shortest $a$ has length 1 (by $R_+^*$ actuin), rotate it to be $(1,0)$ (by $SO(2)$ action). Now we need to decide the second basis vector $b$.  

We know that $|b| \ge 1$ because $a$ was the shortest. We know $y_b \ne 0$ because $a,b$ is a basis. Therefore we replace $b$ with $-b$ if necessary to make $y_b$ positive.  
We can replace $b$ with $b+na, n \in Z$ so that $|x_b| \le 1/2$. If $x_b < 0$, we can take $-a, b$ as a basis and apply reflection around y-axis. Then we have $b$ in the region
$$B = \{(x_b, y_b): y_b \ge 0, 0 \le x_b \le 1/2, |(x_b,y_b)| \ge 1 \}$$
and the conclusion is that $L \simeq L_b := Z + Zb$ for $b \in B$.  

If $b$ is **strictly inside** the region, then $\bar{\Gamma} = 1, C_2$  
If $b \perp a, |b| \ne 1$, then $\bar{\Gamma} = 1, C_2, D_2, D_4$  
If $b \perp a, |b| = 1$, then $\bar{\Gamma} = 1, C_2, C_4, D_2, D_4, D_8$  
If $b = (1/2,\sqrt{3}/2)$, then the "hexagonal lattice",  $\bar{\Gamma} = 1, C_2, C_3, C_6, D_2, D_6, D_12$  

We abstract $G = R^2 \cdot O(2)$ of motion on $R^2 = S$ to general group $G$ of action on a set $S$  
$G \times S \rightarrow S$  
$(g,s) \mapsto g(s)$  
Demand: $e(s) = s, \forall s \in S; \quad (gh)\circ s=g(h(s)), \forall g,h \in G, s \in S$

Example: Action of $G=R^2 \cdot O(2)$ on the set of lines $l \subset R^2$

Example: Action of $G=R^2 \cdot O(2)$ on the set of all triangles in $R^2$

Two comcepts:  
Given $s \in S$,  
**Orbit**: $O_s := \{g(s): \text{ for some }g \in G \} \subset S$  
**Stabilizer** $G_s := \{g \in G : g(s) = s\} \subset G$

Ex0 : $G = R^2 \cdot O(2), S = R^2$ then $O_0 = S, G_0 = SO(2)$  
Ex1 : $G = R^2 \cdot O(2), S = \text{lines in }R^2$, then $O_{y=0} = S$  
Ex2 : $G = R^2 \cdot O(2), S = \text{triangles in }R^2$, but $O_{some\triangle} \ne S$

If $O_s = S$ we called the $G$ acts **transitively** on $S$.  
Natrurally, $G$ acts transitively on $O_s$.  

Model case of a transitive $G$ action  
Let $G$ be any group and $H$ be any subgroup of $G$, let $S = G/H = \{aH : a \in G\}$.  
$G$ acts on $S$ by 
$$ g(aH) = ga\;H$$
This is transitive since $a(H) = aH \Rightarrow O_H = S$.  

What is $G_H$? $G_H = \{g \in G: gH = H\} = H$.  
What is $G_{aH}$? $G_{aH} = \{g \in G: gaH = aH\} = \{g \in G: a^{-1}gaH = H\} = aHa^{-1}$.  

More generally, if $G$ acts transitively on $S$: For any fixed $s \in S$, and $s' \in S$, $\exists g \in G$ such that $g(s) = s'$ and moreover $G_{s'} = g G_s g^{-1} \subset G$ so all **stabilizers are conjugate**.  

In fact, the general transitive action is no more general than the coset action. Because if $G$ acts transitively on S and $s \in S$ has stabilizer $G_s$ the there is a bijection of $G$-set
$$G/G_s \rightarrow S;\quad \text{by } g \mapsto g \cdot s$$

This is well defined as only depends on coset $gG_s$.  
Then we can identify all transitive action as the model case, the transitive action determines a subgroup that stabilize the classes.  

We break the set into $O_s, O_t,...$ and each orbit we have a trasitive action $G$

A transitive action of $G$ is exactly the same as a conjugacy classes of subgroup of $G$.  

In cases where $G$ &  $S$ are finite, we get many intersting combinatorial formulas #G = #S * #G_S.  

G acts on $S =G$ by conjugation $s \mapsto gsg^{-1}$  
Orbit: conjugacy classes.  
Gs: centralizer of s.  

# Lec 18  
$G$ acts on a set $S$.  
$G \times S \rightarrow S$ by $(g,s) \mapsto g \cdot s$.  
Fixed $s \in S$  
orbit $O_s \subset S$, and  
stabilizer $G_s \subset G$.  
$G/G_s \simeq \rightarrow O_s$ as a $G-$set by  $gG_s \mapsto g \cdot s$  
Suppose $s' = g \cdot s$ we have $G_{s'} = g G_s g^{-1}$ which forms a conjugacy subgroup of $G$.  

Suppose $G$ acts on $S$ with orbits $O_{s_1}, O_{s_2}...O_{s_n}$, $|G|$ and $|S|$ are both finite. Then 
$$|S| = \sum_{i=1}^n |O_{s_i}| = \sum_{i=1}^n |G / G_{s_i}| = |G| \sum_{i=1}^n 1/|G_{s_i}|$$

Example: $G \supset\text{(finite) } H$ and $G \supset K \supset K \cap H$ proposition $[G:K] \ge [H: H \cap K]$.  
Proof. Let $S = G/K$ and then $|S| = [G:K]$. $G$ acts transitively in $S$ and we can restrict the action of $G$ on $S$ to the subgroup $H$. This action is a union of $H-$orbits. Consider the orbit of the coset $s = eK$ under the action of $H$, $O_s \simeq H/H_s$ where $H_s = \{h \in H, hK = K\} = H \cap K$. Note that $H-$orbits can cover at most $G-$orbits therefore $[G:K] \ge [H:H \cap K]$.  

Example: $G$ acts on transitively on $S = G$ by left mult. $g \cdot s = gs$ we have $O_e = S$.  
Example: But there is a more interesting action of $G$ on $S = G$, namely by **conjugation**.  
$$g \cdot s = gsg^{-1}$$
it's easy to veryfy that $(gh) \cdot s = g \cdot (h \cdot s)$.  
$O_e = \{e\}$ because mult. with E is commutative. $G_e=S$, unless $G = \{e\}$ trivially, this action is **not transitive**.  
For a general element $O_s = \{gsg^{-1}: g \in G\}$ by definition is called the **conjugacy class** of $s$.  
$$|G| = \sum_{\text{conjugacy classes}} |O_s| = \sum_{\text{conjugacy classes of }s} |G|/|Z_s|$$
where $Z_s$ is the centralizer of $s$ and is defined as $\{g \in G : gsg^{-1} = s\} = G_s$.  

When $G$ is Abelian, each $|O_s| = 1$ and $G_s = G$ so this formula is adding |G| 1s thus not interesting.  

Example: $G = S_3$ The conjugacy classes
1. $\{e\}$
2. $\{3 \text{ elements of order } 2\}$
3. $\{2 \text{ elements of order } 3\}$

class equation $6 = 1 + 3 + 2$  
$Z_e = G; O_e = \{e\}$  
$\tau^2 = e; Z_\tau = \{e, \tau \}; O_{\tau} = \{3 \text{ elements of order } 2\}$  
$\sigma^3 = e; Z_\sigma = \{e, \sigma, \sigma^2 \}; O_{\sigma} = \{2 \text{ elements of order } 3\}$  

Monster Group  
$|G| \sim 10^{49}$ but with $<200$ conjugacy classes(highly non-Ablelian).  

Question: For conjugacy action, when is $|O_s| = 1$? i.e. when is $\{g: gs = sg\} = G_s = G$?  
Answer: When $s \in$ center of $G$! i.e. $s$ commutes with any $g \in G$.  

Theorem: If $|G| = p^m$ with $p$ prime, then $Z \ne \{e\}$.  
Proof. $|G|/|Z_s| = p^k$ with $0 \le k \le n$ So all of $|O_s|$ is divisible by $p$ except when $k=0$ and $|O_s = 1| \Rightarrow |Z(G)|$ the order of the center is divisible by $p$ with order $\ne 1$.  

Burside: If $|G| = p^mq^n$ with $p$ prime $q$ prime, then $G$ is **not simple**.  
Not an example: $A_5$ is a simple group of order $60 = 2^2 \times 3 \times 5$  

If $G$ is of prime power order $Z =$ center $\ne \{e\}$  
$G_1 = G / Z$ has prime power order $|G_1| < |G|$  
$Z_1$ be center of $G_1$ and $Z_1 \ne \{e\}$  
$|G_2| = G_1 / Z_1$  
...  
inductively break down to trivial group.  
Remember the consequence of ealier result: $G$ is not simple unless $|G| = p$.  

Finite subgroups $G \subset SO(3)$ preserving the regular solid in $R^3$.  
Every $g \in G$ is rotation around an axis, $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & \tilde{A}\end{bmatrix}$. So A rotate around axis   

First case: Tetrahedron 4 vertices, 6 edges, 4 faces.   
$G$ preserving tetrahedron is a subgroup of $S_4$, considering the permutation of the vertices.  
$G$ acts transitively on $S =$ set of $4$ vertices. $|S| = 4 = |G|/|G_{vertex}| = |G|/3$  
therefore we have $|G| = 12$  
There are totally $9$ kinds of rotation that preserves some of the vertices and there are three left, which we claim is the edge-preserving rotation that has order $2$,(because we have 6 edges, $|S| = 6$ and $|G_s| = 2$)
In fact, $|G| \simeq A_4$ because $A_4$ is the only subgroup of $S_4$ that has order $12$, which we'll see later.  

Second case: For octahedron, $|S| = 6 = |G| / |G_{vertex}| = |G| /4$, so $|G| = 24, G \simeq S_4$ and for cube the same.  

Third case: Icosahedron: 12 vertices, 20 faces, 30 edges. $|G| \simeq A_5$, the first simple non-Abelian group.

Note: $G$ acts on $G/H = S$, where $H \triangleleft G$ is normal. Then $G_s = H$ for every $s \in S$, the stabilizer does not pick out the element. This explains why in octahedron case, we may have stabilizers for two opposite vertices the same, or in one sentence, the conjugation of group is sometimes the same group.    

A physical conjecture of the shape of universe  
Universe = Poincare 3-Sphere = $SO(3)/A_5$  
$SO(3)$ is a **closed 3-dim shape** because acts transitively on $S^2$ with stabilizer of a point $p$, $G_p \simeq SO(2)$. Now $SO(2)$ is a one-dim group and $S_2$ is 2-dim. As anology to "the order of the set is the order of the group divided by the order of the stabilizer", the dim of $S^2$ is the dim of $SO(3)$ minus $SO(2)$.  
In terms of homology ($H_0 = H_3 = Z, H_1 = H_2 = 0$), $SO(3)/A_5$ is the same as $S^3 \subset R^4$, but they have different fundamental groups, i.e. $\{1\}$ for $S^3$ but $\tilde{A_5}$ for $SO(3)/A_5$.  

# Lec 19  
The only abelian simple groups are the simple cyclic groups of order prime p.  

Cube preserving rotation, consider the 4 diagonals, $G \subset S_4$ and $|G| = |S_4|$ therefore $G = S_4$.

Dodecahedron 12 pentagon faces, 20 vectices and 30 edges.  

The elements of $\Gamma$ for $S =$ tetrahedron:  
1 identity elements;  
8 rotations of order 3, fixing a vertex;  
4 rotations of order 2, switching pairs of vertices.  

Notation of permutation:  
braket means maps to the beginning. "Follow where the elements go."  

So now in this notation, the element of $\Gamma$ for $S =$ tetrahedron are exactly:  
1. The identity: $(1)(2)(3)(4)$
2. The 8 rotations preserving a vertex $(1)(234), (1)(243)$ etc
3. The 3 rotations switching vertices $(12)(34), (13)(24), (14)(23)$  
   
Example: $S =$ cube, let $S_4$ act on "diagonal of the cube" (faithful action). Then we can permute the diagonals any way we want.  $\Gamma = S_4$.  

Example: Dodecahedron, consider the inscribe cube, and use homomorphism to prove $\Gamma \simeq A_5$.  

Conjugacy classes in $\Gamma$:  
1. 12 faces give 6 diffenrent subgroups of order 5 $\simeq Z/5Z$, thus 24 elements of order 5  
2. 30 edges give 15 different subgroups of order 2 $\simeq Z/2Z$, thus 15 elements of order 2  
3. 20 vertices give 10 different subgroups of order 3 $\simeq Z/3Z$, thus 20 elements of order 3  

Argue each of these by non-intersection of subgroups of prime orders.  
Thus these plus identity are complete list of $\Gamma:$ 
$$60 = 1 + 15 + 20 + 24$$

Remember that conjugate elements have the same order: $(hgh^{-1})^m = hg^mh^{-1}$.  

Note that the order of conjugacy class divides the order of the group, because $|O_{s}| = |G|/|Z_s|$ if $|G|$ acts by conjugating. However $24$ does not divide $60$. It turns out that the elements of order $5$ split into two conjugacy classes and the **conjugacy class equation** is 
$$60 = 1 + 15 + 20 + 12 + 12$$

We then show elements of order 2 is conjugate by marking edges; elements of order 3 are conjugate and two sets of elements of order 5 are conjugate respectively, using geometric argument.  

So indeed there are 5 conjugacy classes.  

Proposition: $A_5$ is a simple group.  
Proof. Suppose $H \triangleleft G$ is a non-trivial normal subgroup. Since $gHg^{-1} = H, \forall g \in G$, any $h \in H$ we know the conjugacy class of $h$ is in $H$, i.e. $H$ is the union of some conjugacy classes. Note that $|H|$ divides $|G|$ and the only way is that $H = G$, contradicting the assumption that $H$ is non-trivial.  

In our notation for permutations, 
$$ g = (1,2,3,4,5), g' = g^2 = (1,3,5,2,4)$$
$g'$ are conjugate in $S_5$ but not in $A_5$.  

Aside on finite simple groups: refer to Atlas of Finite Groups.  
Finite Simple Subgroups:  
1. $A_5,A_6 ..., n \ge 5$.
2. $SL_2(Z/pZ) / \{\pm I\}$ is simple for prime $p\ge5$.  
   #$GL_2(Z/pZ) = (p^2 - 1)(p^2 - p)$.  
   $GL_2(Z/pZ) \rightarrow (Z/pZ)^*$ by det, and the image has order $p-1$. The kernel of this map has order $p(p^2-1)$ which is also the order of $SL_2(Z/pZ)$.  
   The order of $SL_2(Z/pZ) / \{ \pm I\}$ is therefore $p(p^2-1)/2$. Isomorphic to $A_5$ when $p = 5$.
3. Chevalley : finite group of Lie types.  
4. Matier: Sporatic Groups and Monster Group (24)

Recall that If $|G| = p^m$ then the center $Z_G \ne \{e\}$.  
Corollary: If $|G| = p$ then $G$ is cyclic and generated by any $g \ne e$  
Corollary: If $|G| = p^2$ then $G$ is **abelian**.  
Proof. If $|Z_G| = p^2$ then we are done.  
If $|Z_G| = p$ then take $g \in G - Z_G$, consider 
$$Z_g \supset \braket{Z_G, g} \supsetneq Z_G$$
Then $|Z_g| = p^2$ which means $Z_g = G$, i.e. $g \in Z_G$, contradiction.  

This cannot hold for higher $n$ of $p^n$.
Example: a non-abelian group of order $p^3$  
$G \subset GL_3(Z/pZ)$ where
$$G = \Big\{\begin{bmatrix} 1 & x & y \\ 0 & 1 & z \\ 0 & 0 & 1\end{bmatrix} \Big\}$$
And 
$$Z_G = \Big\{\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & y \\ 0 & 1 & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1\end{bmatrix} \Big\}$$
has order $p$.  

# Lec 20  
We know that any group of order $p^2$ is abelian. Actually there are only two such groups, up to isomorphism. We also know that any group of order $p$ is cyclic and isomorphic to $Z/pZ$.  

Remark: On group of order $p^2$, here are two possibilities:
1. There is an element $g \in G$ of order $p^2$. Then $G$ is cyclic and generated by $g$. $G \simeq \rightarrow Z/p^2Z$ by $g^k \mapsto \bar{k}, 0 \le k \le p^2-1$.  
2. There is no element of $p^2$ then all non-identity elements have order $p$. Then the field $Z/pZ$ acts on $G$ by $a \cdot g = g^a = g...g(a \text{ times})$ and $0 \cdot g = e$. So $G$ is a vector space of dimension 2.  

Note: $n \ge 1, G = (Z/pZ)^n$, the n-dim vector space over field $Z/pZ$ has order $p^n$ and every non-identity element has order $p$. It is called "**elementary abelian p-group**".  

**Sylow theorems**  
We have already seen, $G$ acts on $S = G$ by conjugation 
$$g \cdot s = gsg^{-1}$$
$O_s$ = Orbit = conjugacy classes of $s$.  
$G_s$ = centralizer of $s$ = $\{g: gs = sg\}$.  

$G$ may also acts on the **set of all subgroups** $S = \{H: H \subset G \text{ be a subgroup}\} =: \mathcal{H}$
$$g \cdot H = g H g^{-1} = \text{ another subgroup of } G \text{, an element of } \mathcal{H}$$
$O_H$ the set of subgroups that conjugate to $H \subset \mathcal{H}$.  
$G_H = \{g: gHg^{-1} = H\} (\subset G)$ = **normalizer** of $H$ =: $N(H)$.  

Note: 
$$H \triangleleft N(H) \subset G$$
$H$ is normal in $N(H)$ since the definition. In fact, $N(H)$ is the largest subgroup of $G$ in which $H$ is normal.  $N(H)$ can be as small as $H$, as large as $G$ or in the middle.  

Example: In $S_3$, take $H = A_3 = \{e, (132), (123)\} \triangleleft S_3$ then $N(H) = S_3$; take $H = \{e, (12)\} \subset S_3$ then $N(H) = H$.  

Example: In $GL_2(F)$ over any field. $H = \Big\{ \begin{bmatrix} 1 & b \\ 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}: b \in F \Big\} \subset G = GL_2(F)$, then $H \subsetneq N(H) = \Big\{ \begin{bmatrix} a & b \\ 0 & d \end{bmatrix}: a,b,d \in F \Big \} \subsetneq G$  

**Theorem(Sylow)**:  
Assume $G$ is a finite group of order $N = p^m n$ with $p \nmid n$. Then: 
1. There is a subgroup $H$ of $G$ of order $p^m$, which we call **Sylow p-subgroup**, it is not necessarily unique.
2. If $K$ is a subgroup of order $p^a, a \le m$ then $K$ is contained in a conjugate of $H$. As a result, any two Sylow p-subgroups $H$ and $H'$ are conjugate.  
3. The number $l$ of Sylow p-subgroup of $G$, i.e. the size of conjugacy classes, divides $n$ and satisfies $l \equiv 1 \;(\text{mod}\; p)$.  

*Lemma 1*: ${p^m n}\choose{p^m}$ is not divisible by $p$.  

Proof. Consider 
$$\frac{(p^m n)(p^m n -1) ... (p^m n - p^m + 1)}{(p^m)(p^m-1)... (1)}$$
for correspondent part,  $p$ divides $p^m n - k$ and $p^m - k$ for the same number of times. At last there would not be factor of $p$ left. 

*Lemma 2*: Let $G$ acts on the set of subsets of $G$ by **left** multiplication. Let $U$ be a subset of $G$. The order of the stabilizer $G_U$ has order that divides both $|U|$ and $|G|$.  

Proof. $|G_U|$ divides $|G|$ because it forms a subgroup. $|G_U|$ divides $|U|$ because the $G_U$ orbit of $u \in U$ is a right cosets of $G_U$ which is also a subset of $|U|$. So $U$ can be partitioned into unions of rights coset of $G_U$ and any two of these cosets do not intersect. Therefore $|G_U|$ divides $|U|$. 

Proof 1.  Let $S = U$ be the set of all subsets of $G$ of order $p^m$. Let $G$ acts by left multiplication on $S$. Want to show one of the subsets is a sylow p-subgroup. 
$$p \nmid |S| = \sum_{classes} |O| = \sum_{classes} |G| / |G_u| $$
there must be some class such that $p \nmid (p^m n/|G_u|)$, and use lemma 2 we have $|G_u|$ divides $p^m$ (u is a subset) and therefore $|G_u| = p^m$. This subgroup is a sylow p-subgroup.  

Proof 2.  Take a Sylow p-subgroup $H$ of $G$ and consider $G$ acts on the set $C$ of all its cosets in $G$, then it has the following properties: $p$ does not divide $|C| = n$; the operation is transitive on $C$; and $C$ contains an element $c$ such that the stabilizer is $H$.  
(The last is called the **fixed point theorem**. A p-group $H$ acting on $S$ of order $p \nmid |S|$ and by counting formula, $p \nmid |S| = \sum |H|/|H_s|$, there must be some $|H|/|H_s| = 1$).  
We restrict the group operation of $G$ on $C$ to the p-group $K$. Again by fixed point theorem, we have a $c'$ such that $K c' = c'$. $G$ acts transitively on $C$ therefore $c' = gc$ for some $g$, and as a result
$$Kgc = gc \Rightarrow g^{-1}Kg c  = c \Rightarrow g^{-1}Kg \subset H$$

Proof 2(another version). $G$ acts transitively on $S = G/H$ and $H$ is the stabilizer for $eH$, therefore any $sH$ has stabilizer $sHs^{-1}$. Consider $K$ acts on $S = G/H$ and use the counting formula, we have there's some s' such that $G_{s'H} = K$, that means $K s'H = s'H$, $K \subset s'Hs'^{-1}$.  

Proof 3. $G$ acts (by conjugation) transitively  on the set of all Sylow p-subgroups, by part 2. Then the stabilizer, $G_H = N(H)$. The set are of the same conjugacy class, therefore $l = |S| = |G|/|G_H| = |G|/|N(H)|$  

Since $H \subset N(H)$, $N(H)$ has order divisible by $p^m$. So the order of $S$ divides $|G|/|H| = n$

Let $S$ be the set of all Sylow p-subgroup, and $H$ be one of the elements. Let $H$ acts on $S$ by conjugation and according to the counting formula

$$ l = |S| = 1 (|O_H|) + \sum_{s \ne H} |H|/|H_{s}|$$

Assume that for some conjugate of $H$, namely $H'$, $|O_{H'}|=1$. Then $|H_{H'}| = |H|$, $H$ stabilize $H'$. $H \subset N(H')$ and naturally $H' \subset N(H')$. $N(H') \subset G$ implies that $|O(N(H'))| = p^m n'$ and notice that both $H$ and $H'$ are sylow p-subgroup of $N(H')$ then according to Sylow 2, $H = n H' n^{-1}$ for some $n \in N(H')$, which shows $H = H'$.  

As a result all non-H orbit has order divisible by $p$, $l \equiv 1 (\text{mod }p)$.  

# Lec 21  
For Sylow p-subgroup, the number of such subgroups is $l = 1$ **if and only if** it is **normal** in $G$.  

Classification Theorems  
$|G| = p$ then $G$ is cyclic, $G \simeq Z/pZ$;  
$|G| = p^2$ then $G$ is abelian, $G \simeq (Z/pZ)^2$ or $G \simeq Z/p^2Z$;  
$|G| = pq$, $p<q$, $p$ and $q$ are both primes.  
1. Sylow p-group $H_p = \braket{\tau}$ and Sylow q-group $H_q = \braket{\sigma}$ are cyclic and isomorphic to $Z/pZ$ and $Z/qZ$ respectively.  
2. As a set $G = H_p H_q = \{\tau^a \sigma^b,  1 \le a \le p, 1 \le b \le q\}$  
3. $G = \bigcup_{1 \le a \le p} \tau^a H_q$. We calim these cosets do not interset, because for $\tau \ne \tau'$ but $\tau h_1 = \tau' h_2$, we have $H_p \ni \tau^{-1} \tau' = h_1 h_2^{-1} \in H_q \Rightarrow \tau^{-1} \tau' \in H_p \cap H_q  = \{e\} \Rightarrow \tau = \tau'$ an contradiction.  

But we want to know what arbitrary $\tau^a \sigma^b \tau^{a'} \sigma^{b'}$ is.  
First observation: $H_q \triangleleft G$ because Sylow third theorem, number of $H_q$ satisfies $l | p$ and  $l \equiv 1 (\text{mod }q)$. Given $p < q$, we can only have $l = 1 \Rightarrow H_q$ is normal in $G$.  

As a result $\tau \sigma \tau^{-1} = \sigma^a, (1 \le a \le p-1)$. By induction $\tau^b \sigma \tau^{-b} = \sigma^{a^{b}}$ (the exponent is $a^b$). Given $\tau^p = e$, $\sigma = \sigma^{a^p} \Rightarrow$ 
$$a^p \equiv 1 (\text{mod }q)$$
If $a = 1$, $\tau\sigma = \sigma \tau$ abelian, therefore $G \sim Z/pqZ$ and $G$ is generated by $\sigma \tau$.  

Example: $p=2, q=3$, $H_p = \{e, \tau\}, H_q = \{e, \sigma, \sigma^2\}$
$$\tau \sigma \tau^{-1} = 
\begin{cases} 
\sigma \Rightarrow \tau \sigma = \sigma \tau \Rightarrow G \text{ is Abelian,} \simeq Z/6Z, G = \braket{\sigma\tau} \\
\sigma^2 = \sigma^{-1} \Rightarrow G \simeq D_6 \simeq S_3
\end{cases}$$

Example: $p = 2, q > 2$, $H_p = \{e, \tau\}, H_q = \{e, \sigma, ..., \sigma^{q-1} = \sigma^{-1}\}$
$$a^2 \equiv 1 (\text{mod }q) \Rightarrow q | (a+1)(a-1) \Rightarrow a \equiv \pm 1 (\text{mod }q)$$
$$\tau \sigma \tau^{-1} = 
\begin{cases} 
\sigma \Rightarrow \tau \sigma = \sigma \tau \Rightarrow G \text{ is Abelian,} \simeq Z/pqZ, G = \braket{\sigma\tau} \\
\sigma^{-1} \Rightarrow G \simeq D_{2q}
\end{cases}$$

Example $p=3,q=5$ $H_5 = \braket{\sigma} \triangleleft G, H_3 = \braket{\tau}$  
In fact, in this case, $H_3$ is normal as well because the number of Sylow 3-subgroup must divide 5 and must be congruent to 1 modulo 3, therefore the number must be 1, which shows $H_3 \triangleleft G$.  
$\tau \sigma \tau^{-1} = \sigma^a$ where $a^3 \equiv 1(\text{mod }5)$, if we check all elements of $Z/5Z$ then we know the only solution $a = 1$, and therefore $\tau \sigma = \sigma \tau$ and $G \simeq Z/15Z$.  

Example $p=3, q=7$. $H_7$ is normal, $H_3$ may not be normal, i.e. there can be 1 or 7 Sylow 3-subgroup. $a^3 \equiv 1(7) \Rightarrow a = 1,2,4$. So  
$$\tau \sigma \tau^{-1} = 
\begin{cases} 
\sigma \Rightarrow \tau \sigma = \sigma \tau \Rightarrow G \text{ is Abelian,} \simeq Z/21Z, G = \braket{\sigma\tau} \\
\sigma^2 \text{ give isomorphic nonabelian groups of order 21, with 7 Sylow 3-subgroups}\\
\sigma^4
\end{cases}$$
Consider when $\tau \sigma \tau^{-1} = \sigma^2$, we have $\tau^2 \sigma \tau^{-2} = \sigma^{4}$ where $\tau^2$ can be treated as another generator for $H_3$.

Remark: The subgroups we've written down so far actually exist -- see Coxeter presentation.  

Remark: Classification quickly becomes more complicated for $|G|$ taking forms other than the ones like above.  

Groups for order $12 = 2^2 \cdot 3$  
There are 5 distinct groups, two of which are abelian, namely $Z/12Z, Z/2Z \times Z/6Z$.  
$H_4$ in $G$ has order $4$ and is either isomorphic to $Z/4Z$ or $(Z/2Z)^2$  
$H_3$ in $G$ has order $3$, $H_3 = \{1 , \sigma, \sigma^2\}$.  

\# of Sylow 2-subgroup is either 1 or 3  
\# of Sylow 3-subgroup is either 1 or 4  

**One or the other of these is normal.**  

Imagine we have 4 Sylow 3-subgroup. They only intersect at $e$ and therefore we get 8 non-identity elements of order 3. There must be a Sylow 2-group of order 4 in $G$ therefore $\{e\} \cup \{\text{the remaining 3}\}$ is the Sylow 2-subgroup $H_4$.  

The remaining possibilities,  
one is $A_4$ (Sylow 2-subgroup is normal)  
one is $D_{12}$ (Sylow 3-subgroup is normal)  
one is new.  

See Artin for a full treatment.  

# Lec 22  
Symmetric Group Representation
Verbose Notation
$$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & 3 & 4 & 5 \\ 3 & 1 & 2 & 5 & 4\end{bmatrix}$$
Cycle Notation
$$(132)(45)$$

Any permutation can be written uniquely as a product of disjoint cycles, up to reordering of cycles/ dropping 1-cycles/ cyclicly permuting the elements in a cycle.  

Composition of permutations:  
$pq$: first do $q$ then do $p$.  
Disjoint cycles commute.  

Conjugation:  
$qpq^{-1}$ has the same cycle shape as $p$. Moregenerally, $qpq^{-1}$ take $q(i)$ to $q(p(i))$, and we can say
$$p = (i_1\;i_2\;...\;i_r)(j_1\;j_2\;...\;j_s)...$$
for example . The conjugation 
$$qpq^{-1} = (q(i_1)\;q(i_2)\;...\;q(i_r))...$$

Proposition: Two permutations which are conjugate in $S_n$ have the same cycle shape (i.e. when expressed as a product of disjoint cycles). Convesely, if two permutations have the same cycle shape they are conjugate.  

Example: Determine $q$ such that $q(123)(45)q^{-1} = (245)(13)$  
$q(1) = 2, q(2) = 4, q(3) = 5, q(4) = 1, q(5) = 3$.  

Suppose $p$ has $a_i$ i-cycle, then the number of $q$ that satisfy $qpq^{-1} = p$ is 
$$\Pi_{i=1}^{\infty} a_i ! i^{a_i}$$
which is the order of the stabilize of $q$.  
\# of conjugacy class of $p$ i.e. the orbit of $p$ under conjugation, is $n!/\Pi_{i=1}^{\infty} a_i ! i^{a_i}$.

$S_5$ Classes  
$|S_5| = 120$.  
conjugate classes  
5-cycle $5 \times 4 \times 3 \times 2 \times 1 / 5 = 24$  
4-cycle $5 \times 4 \times 3 \times 2 / 4 = 30$  
3-cycle $5 \times 4 \times 3 / 3 = 20$  
2-cycle $5 \times 4 / 2 = 10$  
1-cycle $1$  
3-cycle 2-cycle $5 \times 4 \times 3 / 3 = 20$  
2-cycle 2-cycle $5 \times 4 / 2 \times 3 \times 2 / 2 / 2 = 15$  

$S_p$ for $p$ prime, then we have Sylow p-group generated by $(1\;a_2\;...\;a_p)$, each of the group contains $p-1$ such non-identity permutations, and they intersect only on identity. Therefore we have $(p-1)!$ such permutations, divided into $(p-2)!$ such kind of Sylow p-group, and as a result of Sylow third theorem
$$(p-2)! \equiv 1 (\text{mod }p) \Rightarrow (p-1)! \equiv -1 (\text{mod }p)$$
It's part of the Wilson's theorem.

# Lec 23  
Sylow Theorems  
Let $G$ be a group of order $p^n m$ where $p \nmid m$. Then:  
1. Sylow p-subgroup exists and $n_p(G) :=\#\{\text{Sylow p-subgroups}\} \equiv 1 (\text{mod }p)$ and $n_p(G) | m$.  
2. All sylow p-subgroups are conjugate.  

Consequences:  
Let $H \subset G$ be a sylow p-subgroup
1. $H$ is normal $\iff n_p(G) = 1$.  
2. $[G:N_G(H)] = n_p(G)$ where $N_G(H)$ is the normalizer of $H$ in $G$.  
3. If $|G| = pm$ then the number of elements of order $p$ in $G$ is $n_p(G)(p-1)$ (consider $n_p(G)$ Sylow p-subgroups that intersect only at identity).  
   
Applications:  
4. Groups of order $pq$, $p<q$ both are primes. Must have a normal Sylow q-subgroup, because $n_q(G) = 1$. If $p \nmid q-1$ then $n_q(G)= 1$, the Sylow p-subgroup is normal as well.  If $p | q-1$ then there exists a unique non-ablelian group of order $pq$.  
5. Groups of order 12. Either $G$ has a normal Sylow 3-subgroup or $G \simeq A_4$, in which case has a normal Sylow 2-subgroup.  
6. Generally groups of order $p^2q$, if $p > q \Rightarrow$ there must be a normal Sylow p-subgroup; $p<q \Rightarrow$ either $G$ has normal Sylow q-subgroup or $p^2q = 12$ and $G \simeq A_4$.  

Conjugacy in $S_n$  
elements conjugate $\iff$ same cycle shape

Notes on $A_5$  
Proposition: $A_5$ is simple.  
Proposition: If $G$ is a simple group of order 60, then $G \simeq A_5$.

Proof of later prop:  
$n_2(G) \equiv 1 (\text{mod }2); n_2(G)| 15; n_2(G) \ne 1$(or sylow 2 would be normal subgroup). We claim and prove:
1. $n_2(G) \ne 3$  
   It suffices to show $G$ has no subgroups of index less than 5. Once shown, $3 = n_2(G) = [G:N(P)]$($P$ is a Sylow 2-subgroup) is impossible. To show that, we say $[G:H]$ cannot be 2,3 or 4 otherwise it gives a non-trivial homomorphism by left mul the coset $\phi: G \rightarrow Sym(G/H)$ the kernel should be $\{e\}$ because $G$ is simple. The mapping is therefore injective. The image should be at least 60, but $S_n$ cannot be that large, where the contradiction occurs.     
2. If $n_2(G) = 5$, then there exists a subgroup of index 5.  
   Let $P$ be a Sylow 2-subgroup, then $N = N(P)$ has index 5. Let $G$ acts on $G/N$ then we have $\varphi : G \rightarrow Sym(G/N) \simeq S_5$. We konw that $N$ is a proper subgroup of $G$, so $\ker(\varphi) = \{e\}$ and so $G \subset S_5$. Suppose $G \nsubseteq A_5$, Then $GA_5 = S_5$. Then $[G:A_5 \cap G] = [S_5 : A_5] = 2 \Rightarrow A_5 \cap G \triangleleft G$ contradiction since $G$ is simple. $G \subset A_5$, both of order 60, $G = A_5$.   
3. $n_2(G) \ne 15$  
   Assume equal. First we show that the two of Sylow 2-subgroups have non-trivial intersection by counting formula. Then we know $K = C_G(H_1 \cap H_2)$ be the center of $H_1 \cap H_2$. Clearly $H_1,H_2$ abelian and $H_1, H_2 \subset C_G(H_1 \cap H_2) \Rightarrow 4 \big||C_G|, |C_G| \ge 6 , |C_G|\big| 60 \Rightarrow |C_G| = 20$ or $12$, can't be 20 or the index will be $3$. Must be 12, then we have a group whose index is 5, follow step 2 we have $G \simeq A_5$. But $n_2(G) = 5$, contradiction.   
4. Let $G$ acts on $S = G/N$ by left mult.   


Notes on $A_5$ be simple.  
Suppose $N \triangleleft A_5$ and $N \ne A_5, N \ne \{e\}$, then discuss the following case.
1. $5 \big| |N|$ then Sylow 5-subgroups of $N$ are also Sylow 5-subgroups of $G$, then all 6 Sylow 5-subgroups are in $N$, $|N| \ge 25$. $|N| \big| 60 \Rightarrow |N| = 30$. Now $3 \big| |N|$, similarly all 10 Sylow 3-subgroups are in $N$, this gives us more than $30$ elements, contradiction occurs.  
2. $3 \big| |N|$, similar as above, $|N| \ge 21$ and $|N| \big| 60 \Rightarrow |N|=30$.
3. $|N| = 4$ then $N$ is a normal Sylow 2-subgroup, i.e. $n_2(G) = 1$. But we have different Sylow 2-subgroups, contradiction occurs.  
4. $|N| = 2$. Suppose $N = \braket{(a_1\; a_2)}$ where $a_1 \ne a_2$, we can find trivial conjugate of $(a_1\; a_2)$ that is not equal to $(a_1,a_2)$. For example, $(a_1\;a_2\;a_3)(a_1\;a_2)(a_1\;a_3\;a_2) = (a_2\;a_3) \ne (a_1\;a_2)$.  
5. Therefore $N$ does not exist.   

Notes on $A_n$ when $n > 5$.
Suppose $H \triangleleft A_n$ non-trivial, and $G_i \subset A_n$ contains all the elements that fix $i$. Notice that $G_i \simeq A_{n-1}$ is simple and $H \cap G_i \triangleleft G_i$, $H \cap G_i$ is either $\{e\}$ or $G_i$. Then we discuss the two cases:
1. $H \cap G_i = G_i$ for some $i$. This can't hold.  
   Proof. $G_i \subset H$. Then $A_n = \braket{G_1,G_2...G_n} \subset H$, which shows $H = A_n$, contradiction occurs.  
   Or, let $(a_1\;a_2\;a_3)$ be an arbitrary 3-cycle in $S_n$ and choose $y \in \{1,2...n\} - \{a_1,a_2,a_3\}$. Let $\tau$ be any permutation such that $\tau(i) = y$. Then $(a_1\;a_2\;a_3) \in G_y = \tau G_i \tau^{-1} \subseteq \tau H \tau^{-1} = H$. Then $H$ inclues all 3-cycles and $H = A_n$ by the lemma below.  
2. Given $\tau \in H$, only 2-cycles can appear in its disjoint cycle decomposition. See 4.1.
3. Given $\tau \in H$, $\tau$ doesn't just have 2-cycles. see 4.2.  
4. As a result $H \cap G_i = \{e\}$ for every $i$. This cannot hold. We try to show that there's some element $g^{-1}hgh^{-1} \in H$, where $h \in H, g \in G = A_n$ such that it moves **at most 5** elements. This, if shown, would then leads to a non-identity element in $G_i \cap H$, where contradiction occurs. We write $h$ in disjoint cycles.  
   5. Suppose there is an cycle of size equal or more than $3$ in the disjoin decomposition of $h \in H$, then let $h = (a_1\; a_2\; ...) \sigma$ for some $\sigma \in S_n$. We take $g = (a_1\; a_2\; b)$ with some $b \notin \{a_1, a_2, a_3\}$. Then $hgh^{-1} = (h(a_1)\; h(a_2)\; h(b)) = (a_2\; a_3\; h(b))$ and $g^{-1}hgh^{-1} = (a_2\; a_1\; b)(a_2\; a_3\; h(b))$ moves at most 5 elements.
   6. Then we have to show the case when $h$ cosists only of disjoint 2-cycles. Let $h = (a_1\; a_2)\sigma$ for some $\sigma \in S_n$. Let $g = (a_1\; a_2\; a_3)$. Then we have $hgh^{-1} = (h(a_1)\; h(a_2)\; h(a_3)) = (a_2\; a_1\; h(a_3))$, $g^{-1} hgh^{-1} = (a_1\;a_2\;a_3)(a_2\; a_1\; h(a_3))$ moves 4 elements.


**Lemma**: If $n \ge 3$, then $A_n$ is generated by the 3-cycles of $S_n$.  
Proof. $(a_1\; a_2)(a_3\; a_4) = (a_1\; a_2\; a_3)(a_2\; a_3\; a_4)$ and $(a_1\; a_2)(a_1\; a_3) = (a_1\; a_3\; a_2)$.  

**Cauchy's Theorem**  
Let $G$ be a finite group and $p$ be a prime number. If $p$ divides the order of $G$, then $G$ has an element of order $p$.  

Proof 1.  
Case 1. Assume $G$ is Abelian and by induction. When $|G| = p$, $G \simeq Z/pZ$ and any non-identity element has order $p$. Assume it holds for $|G| = mp$ when $m \le n$, then when $|G| = (n+1)p$ and $G$ is Abelian, we chose non-identity $g \in G$ and let $H = \braket{g}$, if $p \big| |H|$ then $g^{|H|/p}$ has order $p$. Otherwise consider the quotient group $G/H$, it has order divisible by $p$ and less than $(n+1)p$, and by assumption it has an element of order $p$. Suppose $(aH)^p = H$ (i.e. $a^p \in H$) and $a$ has order $q$ (i.e. $a^{q} = e$). Then $(aH)^q = eH \Rightarrow p|q$ and $a^{q/p}$ has order $p$. Induction completes the proof.  

Case 2. General $G$ by induction as well. Let $Z$ be the center of $G$, if $p \big| |Z|$ then since $Z$ is abelian and case 1, we are done. Now assume $p \nmid |Z|$. Consider $G$ acts on $G$ by conjugation, every element in the center forms an orbit of size 1, since $p \nmid |Z|$ but $p \big| |G|$ there must be some orbits out of the center of size not divisible by $p$. Suppose $p \nmid |O_a|$ where $a \notin Z$, then the stabilizer of $a$ is a group whose size is divisible by $p$. It has an element of order $p$ by induction. We are done.  

Proof 2.  
Consider the cyclic permutation $G'\;(|G'|=p)$ acts on the set of ordered tuples $S = \{(s_1, s_2...s_p)\in G^p \; : \; s_1...s_p = e\}$. $|S| = |G|^{p-1}$ because we can choose $s_1...s_{p-1}$ arbitrarily but then $s_p$ can only be the inverse of the product, thus unique. The action group has order $p$ therefore the stabilizer can only be identity or the whole group, so the orbit can have size either $1$ or $p$. Now we know $Stb_{(e,e...e)} = G'$ and $|O_{(e,e...e)}| = 1$, there must be some other elements whose orbit has size $p$ and the stabilizer is $G'$, they have the form $(x,x,..x)$ and as a result $x^p = e$.  

**Cayley Theorem**  
Every group is isomorphic to a subgroup of a symmetric group. Consider G acts on G by left multiplication $l_g : G \rightarrow G$, every action $l_g$ is bijective, therefore can be viewed as a permutation of $G$. The map $G \rightarrow Sym(G)$ is injective (consider what they send $e$ to), so it defines an isomorphism from $G$ to some subgroup of $Sym(G)$ or $Sym(|G|)$  

Burnside Theorem    
Burnside Lemma  



